Draft Tourism Policy 2017 of Ministry of Railways is attached below.
The comments / views on the above draft Policy, if any, may please be sent
by 24.04.20170n email to
celltourism@gmail.com
Queries, if any, may be made on

011-23303894

RRKK

TOURISM POLICY - 2017

India has a very rich cultural heritage. Further, Railways have
presence in most parts of the country. It is also in the process of connecting
more places especially the strategic locations that also are tourist places
with limited connectivity at present. Hence, Railways can position itself to
generate substantial revenue focusing on international and domestic
tourists.

1. Vision

Indian Railways wants to position itself as the prime mover for
tourism in the country operating more trains connecting tourists’
destinations and also by providing an array of products starting from luxury
tourist trains to budget catering tourist trains. The infrastructure on
Railways can be leveraged for launching a diverse range of products and
services to ensure bright business prospects with adequate profitability.
2. Strategy

Tourism will be one of the frontline activities with the Railways and
the scope will be increased by focusing on domestic and international
tourists and by making value-added tourism products especially designed
for this segment.
3. Tourism Products

Indian Railways will position the following products for each segment:

(a) Luxury Tourist Trains (LTT).

(b) Semi- Luxury Tourist Trains (SLTT)

(c) Buddhist Special Train (BST)

(d) Bharat Darshan Trains (BDT)


(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(i)
(k)
(1)
(mm)
(n)
(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Astha Circuit Trains (ACT)

State Tirth Trains (STT)
Flexi-package Tourist Trains (FTT)
Ordinary Tourist Trains (OTT)
Ordinary Tourist Coach (OTC)
Dedicated Tourist Coaches (DTC)
Hill Tourist Trains (HTT)

Steam Tourist Trains (ST)
Value-added Tour package (VAT)
Foreign Tourist Quota (FT).
Luxury Tourist Trains (LTT):

Luxury Tourist trains are specifically designed for up market
foreign tourists. These trains should have specially designed
coaches with luxurious interiors, an entertainment lounge,
reading library, bar and very exclusive cuisines. These trains
may be run in partnership with tourist departments of State
Governments and or IRCTC. These trains will have multiple
itineraries and will offer all-inclusive packages covering almost
all the requirements of high end tourists.

Semi- Luxury Tourist Trains (SLTT):

These trains will be operated using a fully air-conditioned rake
comprising different classes of coaches. The fare for this train
will be broadly based on point to point Rajdhani fare. This
service will offer an all inclusive tour package covering train
journey, local transportation, sightseeing, food, etc. at a
standard which can be considered as semi-luxury or a 3 star
hotel level. These trains will be operated on different itineraries,
decided from time to time.

Buddhist Special Train (BST):

This will be similar to other semi-luxury tourist trains and will
be operated on a popular Buddhist circuit.

Bharat Darshan Trains (BDT):


(e)

(f)

(g)

(h)

These will be tourist trains that will be run for the masses with
sleeper class coaches and a pantry car. The fare for this train
will be fixed broadly on the basis of normal fare of mail/express
trains with telescopic benefit for the entire trip. Such tourist
trains will be at affordable rate so that ordinary citizens can use
it. These trains will be operated on different itineraries, to be
decided from time to time, utilizing multiple rakes. This service
will offer an all inclusive tour package covering train journey,
local transportation, sightseeing, food, etc.

Astha Circuit Trains (SCT):

These trains will be operated on the pattern of Bharat Darshan
trains connecting famous religious places.

State Tirth Trains (STT):

These trains will be operated on the specific request from any
State Government on a circuit and composition decided by the
State Government concerned on the basis of full tariff rate.
IRCTC will offer Value Added service to make it an all inclusive
tour packages, the way the State Government desires. The
entire cost will be borne by State Governments concerned.

Flexi-package Tourist Trains (FTT):

The requirements of tourists and their expectations vary in a
wide range depending upon their financial affordability,
expectations in terms of service on and off board. In order to
meet the demand of different classes of tourists, a concept of
tourist trains with differential tariff will be worked out. The
train will comprise different classes of accommodation like
Sleeper 3A, 2A and 1A coaches, as per demand. IR will operate
the train on different circuits with normal tariff or with a mark
up. IRCTC will provide essential onboard and offboard services
like food, security, etc. Tourists will be given a number of
options of their choice for offboard arrangements like
accommodation, sightseeing / pilgrimage, etc at different service
level from a number of service providers, including IRCTC.
Tourists will also be permitted to avail only train journey and
onboard services to facilitate tour planners in deciding packages
as per demand, by availing train journey and onboard services
only from IR/IRCTC.

Ordinary Tourist Trains (OTT):

These trains will be available on hire for specific religious or
other purposes and to be run on Full Tariff Rates (FTR).


(i)

(i)

(k)

(1)

(m)

(n)

Ordinary Tourist Coaches (OTC):

On the pattern of Ordinary Tourist Trains, coaches also will be
available for hire for religious or other purposes on Full Tariff
Rates (FTR).

Dedicated Tourists Coach (DTC):

Ordinary tourist coaches are already available on the basis of
Full Tariff Rates, as per demand. In the case of Dedicated
Tourists Coaches, the section / train on which the tourist
coaches to be operated will be decided by the Railways and such
coaches will be auctioned to the tour operators at a premium
based on which the tour operator may carry’ the
passengers/tourists to be booked by it.

Hill Tourist Trains (HTT):

Hill Tourist Trains are specifically designed trains with varying
composition and will be run on hill section. Their number
should be increased during the season to meet the requirement
of more tourists. An effort will be made to involve private
participation in operating more trains and also to improve the
financial conditions in hill railways in general through Public
Private Partnership.

Steam Tourist Trains (ST):

Steam Tourist Trains are especially attractive for foreign
tourists. Steam trains will be revived, to the extent possible,
and will be operated in hill sections and also other sections
where it is technically and commercially viable.

Value-added Tourist package (VAT):

These will be based on value addition to a train journey at either
end by provision of transport, stay and catering arrangements
on earmark berths on select trains.

Foreign Tourist Quota (FT):

Here some berths are allocated to the foreign tourists from
foreign tourist quota (FTQ). The access to this foreign tourist
quota should be given globally and these should be publicized.
There will be provision for advance booking of seats upto one
year for foreign tourists so that they can plan their journey and
buy tickets in advance.

Charging Principle


The charging principle of above mentioned tourist trains / tourism
products will be decided separately on case-to-case basis.

5. Booking of Tourism Products

Booking of specialized tourism products will be done online through
the websites of IRCTC and / or State Tourism Corporations concerned or
through GSAs / Agents appointed by IRCTC and / or the State Tourism
Corporation concerned.

6. Tourism Promotion

IR will directly promote the tourist trains / tourism products
irrespective of the fact whether it is operated directly by IR or through
IRCTC / State Tourism Corporations both at international / domestic
tourism forums by way of participation in tourism Fairs / Marts,
advertisement through print media, etc.

7. Indian Railway Catering and Tourism Corporation (IRCTC):

IRCTC, the tourism arm of IR, will position itself as a onestop shop for
all the requirements of both domestic and international tourists. In addition
to rail based tourism, IRCTC will strive to work out a link between
Railways, other infrastructure earning agencies, tour operators, etc. in
combing the assets of IR and others to utilize each other’s products /
services mutually beneficial and at the same time make convenience to the
tourists.


