[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 287

MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
(Food Safety and Standards Authority of India)

Notification
New Delhi, dated the 15t August, 2011

F.No. 2-15015/30/2010 Whereas in exercise of the powers conferred by section clause (e) of sub section (2) of section 92
read with 16 of Food Safety and Standards Act, 2006 (34 of 2006) the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India
proposes to make Food Safety and Standards Regulations in so far they relates to Food Safety and Standards (Food
Products Standards and Food Additives) Regulations, 2011, and;

Whereas these draft Regulations were published in consolidated form at pages 1 to 776 in the Gazette of India
Extraordinary Part III—Sec. 4 dated 20 October 2010 inviting objections and suggestions from all persons likely to be
affected thereby before the expiry of the period of thirty days from the date on which the copies of the Gazette containing
the said notification were made available to the public;

And whereas the copies of the Gazette were made available to the public on the 215' October 2010;

And whereas objections and suggestions received from the stakeholders within the specified period on the said
draft Regulations have been considered and finalized by the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India.

Now therefore, the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India hereby makes the following Regulations, namely,—
FOOD SAFETY AND STANDARDS (FOOD PRODUCTS STANDARDS AND FOOD ADDITIVES) REGULATIONS, 2011

CHAPTER 1
GENERAL

1.1: Title and commencement

1.1.1:These regulations may be called the Food Safety and Standards (Food Products Standards and Food Additives)
Regulations, 2011.

1.1.2: These regulatiions shall come into force on or after 5° August, 2011, except the regulations 2.1.7.(1)(2)(3)(4),
2.1.8 (1)(3), 2.1.11 (1)(2), 2.1.12(1), including table 14 of Appendix A and table 2 of Appendix B which shall come in to force
after six months from that date.

Provided that wherever the standards given in these regulations are at variance with any of the provisions of the
licenses already granted, Food Business Operator shall comply with the provisions of these regulations within six months
from the date of commencement of the regulations.

1.2: Definitions
In these regulations unless the context otherwise requires:

1, BOILED MILK means milk which has been brought to boil.

2. “De-oiled meal” means the residual material left over when oil is extracted by a solvent from any oil-bearing
material;

3. DOUBLE TONED MILK means the product prepared by admixture of cow or buffalo milk or both with fresh
skimmed milk, or by admixture of cow or buffalo milk or both that has been standardised to fat and solids-not-fat
percentage given in the table below in 2.1.1:1 by adjustment of milk solids. It shall be pasteurised and shall show a
negative Phosphatase Test. When fat or dry non-fat milk solids are used, it shall be ensured that the product
remains homogeneous and no deposition of solids takes place on standing.

4, “Hydrogenation” means the process of addition of hydrogen to an edible vegetable oil using a catalyst to
produce a fat with semi-solid consistency;

5. Flavoured Milk, by whatever name called, may contain nuts (whole, fragmented or ground) chocolate,
coffee or any other edible flavour, edible food colours and cane sugar. Flavoured milk shall be pasteurised, sterilised
or boiled. The type of milk shall be mentioned on the label.


288 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

6. Full Cream Milk means milk or a combination of buffalo or cow milk or a product prepared by combination
of both that has been standardised to fat and solids-not-fat percentage, given in the table below in 2.1.1:1, by
adjustment/addition of milk solids, Full Cream Milk shall be pasteurised. It shall show a negative phosphatase test.
It shall be packed in clean, sound and sanitary containers properly sealed so as to prevent contamination.

7. ‘Irradiation’ means any physical procedure, involving the intentional exposure of food to ionizing radiations.
8. ‘Irradiation facility’ means any facility which is capable of being utilized for treatment of food by irradiation.
9. ‘Irradiated food’ means articles of food subjected to radiation by :—

(i) Gamma Rays;

(ii) X-rays generated from machine sources operated at or below an energy level of 5 million electron
volts; and

(iii) Sub-atomic particles, namely, electrons generated from machine sources operated at or below an
energy level of 10 million electron volts, to dose levels as specified in Schedule I of the Atomic Energy
(Control of Irradiation of Food) Rules 1991.

10. MILK is the normal mammary secretion derived from complete milking of healthy milch animal without
either addition thereto or extraction therefrom unless otherwise provided in these Regulations. It shall be free from
colostrum. Milk of different classes and of different designations shall conform to the standards laid down in the
Table below in 2.1.1:1

Total urea content in the milk shall not be more than 700 ppm

11. MIXED MILK means a combination of milk of cow, buffalo, sheep, goat or any other milch animal and may
be a combination of any of these milk which has been made and conforms to the standards given in the table below
in2.1.1:1.

12, MILK PRODUCTS means the products obtained from milk such as cream, malai, curd, skimmed milk curd,
chhanna, skimmed-milk chhanna, cheese, processed cheese, ice-cream, milk ices, condensed milk-sweetened and
unsweetened, condensed skimmed milk-sweetened and unsweetened, milk powder, skimmed milk powder, partly
skimmed milk powder, khoa, infant milk food, table butter and desi butter.

Milk products shall not contain any substance not found in milk unless specified in the standards.

13. “Margarine” means an emulsion of edible oils and fats with water;

14. ‘Operator of irradiation facility’ means any person appointed as such by licensee who satisfies the
qualifications and requirements as for training specified in Schedule II of the Atomic Energy (Control of Irradiation
of Food) Rules, 1991

15. PASTEURISATION—

The terms “Pasteurisation”, “Pasteurised” and similar terms shall be taken to refer to the process of
heating every particle of milk of different classes to at least 63° C and holding at such temperature continuously
for at least 30 minutes or heating it to at least 71.5°C and holding at such temperature continuously for at least
15 seconds or an approved temperature time combination that will serve to give a negative Phosphatase Test.

All pasteurised milk of different classes shall be cooled immediately to a temperature of 10° C, or less

16. RECOMBINED MILK means the homogenised product prepared from milk fat, non-fat-milk solids and
water. Recombined milk shall be pasteurised and shall show a negative Phosphatase test.

17. “Refined vegetable oil” means any vegetable oil which is obtained by expression or solvent extraction of
vegetable oil bearing materials, deacidified with alkali and/or by physical refining and/or by miscella refining using
permitted food grade solvents and/or degumming followed by bleaching with absorbent earth and/or activated
carbon and deodorized with steam without using any other chemical agents

18. “Refining” means a process by which an expressed vegetable oil or a solvent-extracted oil is deacidified—
(i) With alkali, or
(ii) by physical refining, or both, or

(iii) By miscella refining using permitted food grade solvent, followed by bleaching with absorbent earth
and/or activated carbon or both of them and deodorized with steam without using any other chemical agent;

(iv) refining if required may include the process of degumming using phosphoric/citric acid.


[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 289

19. SKIMMED MILK means the product prepared from milk from which almost all the milk fat has been
removed mechanically.

20. STERILISATION :The term “sterilisation when used in association with milk, means heating milk in sealed
container continuously to a temperature of either 115° C for 15 minutes or at least 130° C for a period of one second
or more in a continuous flow and then packed under aseptic condition in hermatically sealed containers to ensure
preservation at room temperature for a period not less than 15 days from the date of manufacture;

21, STANDARDISED MILK means cow milk or buffalo milk or sheep milk or goat milk or a combination of any
of these milk that has been standardised to fat and solids-not-fat percentage given in the table below in 2.1.1:1 by
the adjustment of milk solids. Standardised milk shall be pasteurised and shall show a negative Phosphatase Test.

22. “Solvent-extracted oil” means any vegetable oil obtained from oil-bearing material by the process of
extraction by a solvent;

23. “Solvent-extracted edible flour” means the ground material obtained from specially prepared deoiled meal,
that is, the residual material left over when oil is extracted by a solvent from oil cake immediately following the single-
pressing of good quality edible oilseeds;

24, TONED MILK means the product prepared by admixture of cow or buffalo milk or both with fresh skimmed
milk; or by admixture of cow or buffalo milk or both that has been standardised to fat and solids-not-fat percentage
given in the table below in 2.1.1:1 by adjustment of milk solids. It shall be pasteurised and shall show a negative
Phosphatase Test. When fat or dry non-fat-milk solids are used, it shall be ensured that the product remains
homogeneous and no deposition of solids takes place on standing.

25. “Vegetable oils” means oils produced from oilcakes or oilseeds or oil-bearing materials of plant origin and
containing glycerides;

26. “Vegetable oil product” means any product obtained for edible purposes by subjecting one or more edible
oils to any or a combination of any of the processes or operations, namely, refining, blending, hydrogenation or
interesterification and winterization (process by which edible fats and oils are fractioned through cooling), and
includes any other process which may be notified by the Central Government in the official Gazette;

CHAPTER 2
Foop PropucT STANDARDS

2.1: DAIRY PRODUCTS AND ANALOGUES

2.1.1: MILK

1. The standards of different classes and designations of milk shall be as given in the table below. Milk shall
conform to both the parameters for milk fat and milk solids not fat, independently, as prescribed in columns (4) and

(5) of the said table:
Table
Minimum
percent
Class of Milk Designation Locality MilkFat Milk solids
not fat
(1) (2) G3) (4) (5)
Buffalo Milk Raw, Assam, 6.0 9.0
pasteurized, Bihar,
boiled, Chandigarh
flavoured, Delhi
sterlized Gujarat
Haryana
Jharkhand
Maharashtra
Meghalaya
Punjab
Sikkim

Uttar Pradesh



THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY

[Part III—Sec. 4]

(1)

(2)

G3) (4)

(5)

Buffalo Milk

Cow Milk

Cow Milk

Raw,
pasteurized,
boiled,
flavoured,
sterlized

Raw,
pasteurized,
boiled,
flavoured,
sterlized

Raw, boiled,
pasteurized,
flavoured and
sterlized

Uttarakhand
West Bengal

Andaman and Nicobar 5.0
Andhra Pradesh

Arunachal Pradesh
Chhatisgarh

Dadra & Nagar haveli

Goa, Daman & Diu

Himachal Pradesh

Jammu& Kashmir & Karnataka
Kerala

Lakshadweep,

Minicoy & Amindivi Island
Madhya Pradesh

Manipur

Mizoram

Nagaland

Orissa

Puducherry

Rajasthan

Tamil Nadu

Tripura

Chandigarh 40
Haryana
Punjab

Andaman & Nicobar Islands 35
Andhra Pradesh
Arunachal Pradesh
AssamBihar
Chhatisgarh

Dadra & Nagar haveli
Delhi

Goa,

Daman & Diu

Gujarat

Himachal Pradesh
Jammu & Kashmir
Jharkhand

Kamataka

Kerala

Lakshadweep,
Minicoy & Adminidive Islands
Madhya Pradesh
Maharashtra
Manipur

Meghalaya

Nagaland
Puducherry
Rajasthan

Sikkim

Tamil Nadu

Tripura

9.0

85

85



[art II—ars 4]

ART AT USI 2 SATS

291

(1)

(2)

G3) (4)

(5)

Cow Milk

Goat or Sheep Milk

Goat or Sheep Milk

Mixed Milk

Standardized milk

Recombined Milk

Raw, boiled,
pasteurized,
flavoured and
sterlized

Raw, boiled,
pasteurized,
flavoured and
sterlized

Raw, boiled,
pasteurized,
flavoured and
sterlized

Raw,
pasteurised,
boiled,

flavoured and sterilised

Pasteurised,
flavoured and
sterilized

Pasteurised,
flavoured and
sterilized

Uttar Pradesh
Uttarakh and
West Bengal

Mizoram 3.0
Orissa

Chandigarh 3.5
Chhatisgarh

Haryana

Kerala

Madhya Pradesh
Maharashtra

Punjab

Uttar Pradesh
Uttarakhand

Andaman & Nicobar Islands 3.0
Andhra Pradesh
Arunachal Pradesh
Assam

Bihar

Chhatisgarh

Dadra and Nagar haveli
Delhi

Goa,

Daman & Diu

Gujarat

Himachal Pradesh
Jammu & Kashmir
Jharkhand

Karnataka
Lakshadweep,

Minicoy & Amindive Islands
Manipur

Meghalaya’

Mizoram

Nagaland

Orissa

Puducherry

Rajasthan

Sikkim,

Tamil Nadu

Tripura

West Bengal

All India 45

All India 45

All India 3.0

85

9.0

9.0

85

85

85



292 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Toned Milk Pasteurised, All India 3.0 8.5

flavoured and
sterilized
Double Toned milk Pasteurised, All India 1.5 9.0
flavoured and
sterilized
Skimmed Milk Raw, boiled, All India Not 8.7
pasteurised, more
flavoured and than
sterilized 0.5 percent
Full Cream Milk Pasteurised and All India 6.0 9.0
sterilized

NOTE :-(i) When milk is offered for sale without indication of the class, the standards prescribed for buffalo milk shall
apply.

(ii) The heat treatment for the various designated milk shall be as follows:
Designation Heat treatment
Raw Nil.
Pasteurised Pasteurisation.
Boiled Boiling
Flavoured Pasteurisation or Sterilisation
Sterilised Sterilisation

2.1.2 Cream:

1. Cream including sterilised cream means the product of cow or buffalo milk or a combination thereof. It shall
be free from starch and other ingredients foreign to milk. It may be of following three categories, namely:—

1. Low fat cream—containing milk fat not less than 25.0 percent by weight.

2. Medium fat cream—containing milk fat not less than 40.0 percent by weight.

3. High fat cream—containing milk fat not less than 60.0 percent by weight.

Note:- Cream sold without any indication about milk fat content shall be treated as high fat cream.

2. Cream Powder means the product obtained by partial removal of water from cream obtained from milk of cow
and / or buffalo. The fat and / or protein content of the cream may be adjusted by addition and/ or withdrawal of milk
constituents in such a way as not to alter the whey protein to casein ratio of the milk being adjusted. It shall be of
uniform colour and shall have pleasant taste and flavour free from off flavour and rancidity. It shall also be free from
vegetable oil/ fat, mineral oil, added flavour and any substance foreign to milk.

The product may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. It shall conform
to the microbiological requirements prescribed in Appendix B. It shall conform to the following requirements:—
(i) Moisture Not more than 5.0 percent

(i) Milk fat Not less than 42.0 percent
(ii) Milk protein in Milk solid not fat Not less than 34.0 percent

2.1.3: MALAT

1. Malai means the product rich in butter fat prepared by boiling and cooling cow or buffalo milk or a
combination thereof. It shall contain not less than 25.0 per cent milk fat.

2.1.4: DAHIOR CURD

1. Dahi or curd means the product obtained from pasteurised or boiled milk by souring, natural or otherwise,
by a harmless lactic acid culture or other harmless bacterial culture may also be used in conjunction with lactic acid
bacteria cultures for souring. Dahi may contain added cane sugar. Dahi shall have the same minimum percentage of
milk fat and milk solids-not-fat as the milk from which it is prepared.


[art II—ars 4]

FRA AT USTIA + STH 293

Where dahi or curd is sold or offered for sale without any indication of class of milk, the standards prescribed
for dahi prepared from buffalo milk shall apply.

Milk solids may also be used in preparation of this product.

2.1.5: CHHANA OR PANEER

1. Chhana or paneer means the product obtained from the cow or buffalo milk or a combination thereof by
precipitation with sour milk, lactic acid or citric acid. It shall not contain more than 70.0 per cent moisture and the milk
fat content shall not be less than 50.0 per cent of the dry matter.

Milk solids may also be used in preparation of this product.

Provided that paneer or chhana when sold as low fat paneer or chhana, it shall conform to the following
requirements:—

(i) Moisture Not more than 70.0 percent
(it) Milk fat Not more than 15.0 percent of dry matter:

Provided further that such low fat paneer/chhana shall be sold in sealed package only and shall bear proper
label declaration as provided in regulation 2.4.5 (39) of Food Safety and Standards (Packaging and Labeling)
Regulations, 2011.

2.1.6: CHEESE

1, Cheese means the ripened or unripened soft or semihard, hard and extra hard product, which may be coated
with food grade waxes or polyfilm, and in which the whey protein / casein ratio does not exceed that of milk. Cheese
is obtained by coagulating wholly or partly milk and/ or products obtained from milk through the action of non-
animal rennet or other suitable coagulating agents and by partially draining the whey resulting from such coagulation
and/ or processing techniques involving coagulation of milk and/ or products obtained from milk which give a final
product with similar physical, chemical and organoleptic characteristics. The product may contain starter cultures
of harmless lactic acid and / or flavour producing bacteria and cultures of other harmless microorganisms, safe and
suitable enzymes and sodium chloride. It may be in the form of blocks, slices, cut, shredded or grated cheese.

(i) Ripened Cheese is cheese which is not ready for consumption shortly after manufacture but which
must be held for some time at such temperature and under such other conditions as will result in necessary
biochemical and physical changes characterizing the cheese in question.

(ii) Mould Ripened cheese is a ripened cheese in which the ripening has been accomplished primarily by
the development of characteristic mould growth through the interior and/ or on the surface of the cheese.

(iii) Unripened cheese including fresh cheese is cheese which is ready for consumption shortly after
manufacture.

Cheese or varieties of cheeses shall have pleasant taste and flavour free from off flavour and rancidity.

It may contain food additives permitted in these regulation including Appendix A. It shall conform to the
microbiological requirements prescribed in Appendix B:

Provided that cheese or varieties of cheeses coated with food grade waxes/ or polyfilm / or wrapping of cloth
shall bear proper label declaration as provided in regulation 2.4.5 (44) of Food Safety and Standards (Packaging and
Labeling) Regulations, 2011. It shall conform to the following requirements:—

Product Moisture Milk Fat on Dry basis
(1) 2) G3)

(i) Hard Pressed Cheese Not more than 39.0 percent Not less than 48.0

(ii) Semi Hard Cheese Not more than 45.0 percent Not less than 40.0 percent
(iii) Semi Soft Cheese Not more than 52.0 percent Not less than 45.0 percent
(iv) Soft Cheese Not more than 80.0 percent Not less than 20.0 percent
(v) Extra Hard Cheese Not more than 36.0 percent Not less than 32.0 percent
(vi) Mozzarella Cheese Not more than 60.0 percent Not less than 35.0 percent
(vii) Pizza Cheese Not more than 54.0 percent Not less than 35.0 percent



294

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

2. “ Processed Cheese” means the product obtained by grinding, mixing, melting and emulsifying one or more
varieties of cheeses with the aid of heat and emulsifying agents. It may contain cream, butter, butter oil and other
milk products subject to maximum 5.0 percent lactose content in the final product and edible common salt, vinegar/
acetic acid, spices and other vegetable seasoning and foods other than sugars properly cooked or prepared for
flavouring and characterization of the product provided these additions do not exceed one sixth of the weight of the
total solids of the final product on dry matter basis and cultures of harmless bacteria and enzymes. It shall have
pleasant taste and smell free from off flavour and rancidity. It may contain food additives permitted in these
regulation including Appendix A. It shall conform to the microbiological requirements prescribed in Appendix B. It
shall conform to the following requirements:—

(i) Moisture - Not more than 47.0 percent
(ii) Milk fat on dry basis - Not less than 40.0 percent.

Provided that processed cheese chiplets (packed sliced cheese) when sold in a package other than tin, shall
not contain more than 50.0 percent moisture.

3. “ Processed Cheese Spread means the product obtained by grinding, mixing, melting and emulsifying one
or more varieties of cheese with emulsifying agents with the aid of heat. It may contain Cream, Butter oil and other
dairy products, subject to a maximum limit of 5.0 percent lactose in the final product, salt, vinegar, spices, condiments
and seasonings, natural carbohydrate sweetening agents namely sucrose, dextrose, corn syrup, corn syrup solids,
honey, maltose, malt syrup and hydrolysed lactose and food properly cooked or otherwise prepared for flavouring
and characterization of the product provided these additions do not exceed one sixth of the weight of total solids of
the final product on dry weight basis and cultures of harmless bacteria and enzymes. It shall have pleasant taste and
flavour free from off flavour and rancidity. It may contain food additives permitted in these regulation including
Appendix A. It shall conform to the microbiological requirements prescribed in Appendix B. It shall conform to the
following requirements:—

(i) Moisture - Not more than 60.0 percent
(ii) Milk fat on dry basis - Not less than 40.0 percent.

4, Cheddar Cheese means ripened hard cheese obtained by coagulating heated/pasteurised milk of Cow and/
or Buffalo or mixtures thereof with cultures of harmless lactic acid producing bacteria, non-animal rennet or other
suitable coagulating enzymes. It shall be in the form of hard pressed block with a coating of food grade waxes or
wrapping of cloth or polyfilm. It shall have firm, smooth and waxy texture with a pale straw to orange colour without
any gas holes. It may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices including Appendix A.
It shall conform to the microbiological requirements prescribed in Appendix B. It shall conform to the following
requirements:—

(i) Moisture - Not more than 39.0 percent
(i) Milk Fat on Dry Basis - Not less than 48.0 percent

5. Danbo Cheese means ripened semi hard cheese obtained by coagulating heated /pasteurised milk of cow
and/ or Buffalo and mixtures thereof with cultures of harmless lactic acid producing bacteria, non-animal rennet or
other suitable coagulating enzymes. It shall be smooth in appearance with firm texture and uniform yellow colour
and may be coated with food grade waxes or wrapping of cloth or polyfilm. It may contain food additives permitted
in these Regulations including Appendix A. It shall conform to the microbiological requirements prescribed in.
Appendix B. It shall conform to the following requirements:—

(i) Moisture - Not more than 39.0 percent.

(i) Milk Fat on Dry Basis - Not less than 45.0 percent

6. Edam Cheese means the ripened semi hard cheese obtained by coagulating heated / pasteurised milk of Cow
and / or Buffalo or mixtures thereof with cultures of harmless lactic acid producing bacteria non-animal rennet or
other suitable coagulating enzymes. It shall have a firm texture suitable for cutting with a yellowish colour and a hard
rind which may be coated with food grade waxes, wrapping of cloth, polyfilm or vegetable oil. It may contain food
additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. It shall conform to the microbiological requirements
prescribed in Appendix B. It shall conform to the following requirements:—

(i) Moisture - Not more than 46.0 percent.

(ii) Milk Fat on Dry basis - Not less than 40.0 percent.


[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 295

7. Gouda Cheese means ripened semi hard cheese obtained by coagulating milk of Cow and/ or Buffalo or
mixtures thereof with cultures of harmless lactic acid producing bacteria non-animal / rennet or other suitable
coagulating enzymes. It shall have firm texture suitable for cutting, straw to yellowish colour and a hard rind which
may be coated with food grade waxes, wrapping of cloth, or vegetable oil. It may contain food additives permitted
in these Regulations including Appendix “A”. It shall conform to the microbiological requirements prescribed in
Appendix B. It shall conform to the following requirements:—

(i) Moisture Not more than 43.0 percent
(i) Milk Fat on Dry Basis Not less than 48.0 percent.

8. Havarti Cheese means ripened semi hard cheese obtained by coagulating milk of cow and / or Buffalo or
mixtures thereof with cultures of harmless lactic acid producing bacteria, non-animal rennet or other suitable
coagulating enzymes. It shall have firm texture suitable for cutting, a light yellow colour and may have a semi soft
slightly greasy rind. It may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. It shall
conform to the microbiological requirements prescribed in Appendix B. It shall conform to the following

requirements:—
Requirements Havarti 30 percent Havarti 60 percent Havarti
(1) (2) G3) (4)
Moisture Not more than 48.0 percent | Not moreThan 53.0 percent Notmorethan60.0 percent

Milk Fat on Dry basisBasis Not less than 45.0 percent Not lessthan30.0 percent Notlessthan60.0percent.

9, Tilsiter means ripened semi hard cheese obtained by coagulating milk of Cow and/ or Buffalo or mixtures
thereof with cultures of harmless lactic acid producing bacteria and cultures of Bacterium linens, non-animal rennet
or other suitable coagulating enzymes. It shall have firm texture suitable for cutting with a ivory to yellow colour
with a firm rind which may show red and yellow smear producing bacteria or coated with food grade waxes or
wrapping of cloth or polyfilm after removal of the smear. It may contain food additives permitted in these regulations
including Appendix A. It shall conform to the microbiological requirements prescribed in Appendix B. It shall
conform to the following requirements:—

Requirement Tilsiter 30 percent Tilsiter 60 percent Tilsiter
(1) (2) G3) (4)
Moisture Not more than 47.0 percent Not more than 53.0 percent Not more than 39.0 percent

Milk fat on Dry Basis Not less than 45.0 percent Not less than 30.0 percent Not less than 60.0 percent

10. Cottage Cheese and Creamed Cottage Cheese means soft unripened cheese obtained by coagulation of
pasteurised skimmed milk of Cow and/ or Buffalo or mixtures thereof with cultures of harmless lactic acid bacteria
with or without the addition of other suitable coagulating enzymes. Creamed Cottage Cheese is cottage cheese to
which a pasteurised creaming mixture of cream, skimmed milk, condensed milk, non fat dry milk, dry milk protein,
Sodium/ Potassium/ Calcitum/ Ammonium caseinate is added. It shall have a soft texture with a natural white colour.
It may contain spices, condiments, seasonings and fruits pulp. It may contain food additives permitted in these
regulations including Appendix A. It shall conform to the microbiological requirements prescribed in Appendix B. It
shall conform to the following requirements:—

(i) Moisture Not more than 80.0 percent
(ii) Milk Fat(in Creamed Cottage Cheese) Not less than 4.0 percent

11. Cream Cheese (Rahmfrischkase) means soft unripened cheese obtained by coagulation of pasteurised milk
of cow and / or buffalo or mixtures thereof and pasteurised cream with cultures of harmless lactic acid producing
bacteria with or without the addition of suitable coagulating enzymes. It shall have a soft smooth texture with a
white to light cream colour. It may contain spices, condiments, seasonings and fruits pulp. The product may contain
food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. It shall conform to the microbiological requirements
prescribed in Appendix B. It shall conform to the following requirements:—

(i) Moisture Not more than 55.0 percent.
(i) Milk Fat on Dry Basis Not less than 70.0 percent.


296

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

12. Coulommiers Cheese means soft unripened cheese obtained by coagulation of milk of cow and /or buffalo
or mixtures thereof with cultures of harmless lactic acid producing bacteria and non-animal rennet or other suitable
coagulating enzymes and moulds characteristic of the variety. It shall have soft texture and white to cream yellow
colour and may show presence of white mould including orange or red spots on the surface. It may contain food
additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. It shall conform to the microbiological requirements
prescribed in Appendix B. It shall conform to the following requirements:—

(i) Moisture Not more than 56.0 percent
(i) Milk Fat on Dry Basis Not less than 46.0 percent

13. Camembert Cheese means ripened soft cheese obtained by coagulating milk of Cow and/ or Buffalo or
mixtures thereof with cultures of harmless lactic acid producing bacteria and cultures of Penicillium caseicolum and
Bacterium linens non-animal rennet or other suitable coagulating enzymes. It may be in the form of flat cylindrical
shaped cheese covered with white mould (Penicillum caseicolum) with occasional orange coloured spots (Bacterium
linens). It may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. It shall conform to the
microbiological requirements prescribed in Appendix B. It shall conform to the following requirements:—

Requirements 30.0 percent Camembert 40.0 percent Camembert 45.0 percent Camembert 50.0 percent

cheese cheese cheese Camembert cheese
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Moisture Not more than Not more than Not more than Not more than
62.0 percent 56.0 percent 56.0 percent 56.0 percent
Milk fat on Not more than Not more than Not more than Not more than
Dry Basis 30.0 percent 40.0 percent 45.0 percent 50.0 percent

14. Brie Cheese means soft ripened cheese obtained by coagulating milk of Cow and/ or Buffalo or mixtures
thereof with cultures of harmless lactic acid producing bacteria and cultures of Penicillium caseicolum and Bacterium
linens, non-animal rennet and other suitable enzymes. It shall be white to creamy yellow in colour with a smooth
texture showing presence of white mould (Penicillium caseicolum) with occasional orange coloured spots (Bacterium
linens) on the rind. It may contain food additives permitted in these regulation including Appendix A. It shall
conform to the microbiological requirements prescribed in Appendix B.

It shall conform to the following requirements:—

(i) Moisture Not more than 56.0 percent
(ii) Milk Fat on Dry basis Not less than 40.0 percent

15. Saint Paulin - means ripened semi hard cheese obtained by coagulating milk of Cow and / or Buffalo or
mixtures thereof with non-animal rennet, cultures of harmless lactic acid producing bacteria or other suitable enzymes.
It shall have white to yellow colour with a firm and flexible texture and a hard rind which may be coated with food
grade waxes or polyfilm. It may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. It shall
conform to the microbiological requirements prescribed in Appendix B. It shall conform to the following
requirements:—

(i) Moisture Not more than 56.0 percent
(i) Milk Fat on Dry Basis Not less than 40.0 percent

16. Samsoe means hard ripened cheese obtained by coagulating milk of Cow and /or Buffalo or combination
there of with non-animal rennet and cultures of harmless lactic acid producing bacteria or suitable coagulating
enzymes. It shall be yellow in colour with a firm texture suitable for cutting and may have a rind with or without food
grade waxes or polyfilm coating. It may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A.
It shall conform to the microbiological requirements prescribed in Appendix B. It shall conform to the following
requirements:—

Requirements Samsoe 30 percent Samsoe
(1) (2) G3)
(i) Moisture Not more than 44.0 percent Not more than 50.0 percent

(ii) Milk Fat on Dry Basis Not less than 45.0 percent Not less than 30.0 percent



[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 297

17. Emmentaler means hard ripened cheese with round holes obtained by coagulating milk of Cow and/ or
Buffalo or mixtures thereof with non-animal rennet, cultures of harmless lactic acid producing bacteria or other
suitable coagulating enzymes. It may contain Cupric Sulphate not exceeding 15 mgm/Kg expressed as Copper. It
shall have a light Yellow colour and a firm texture suitable for cutting and may have a hard rind. It may contain food
additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. It shall conform to the microbiological requirements
prescribed in Appendix B.

It shall conform to the following requirements:—
(i) Moisture Not more than 40.0 percent.
(i) Milk Fat on Dry Basis Not less than 45.0 percent

18. Provolone means pasta filata cheese obtained by coagulating milk of Cow and/ or Buffalo or mixtures
thereof with cultures of harmless lactic acid producing bacteria, non-animal rennet or other suitable coagulating
enzymes. It may be smoked. It shall be white to yellow straw in colour with a fibrous or smooth body and rind which
may be covered with vegetable fat/ oil, food grade waxes or polyfilm. It may contain food additives permitted in
these regulations including Appendix A. It shall conform to the microbiological requirements prescribed in Appendix
B. It shall conform to the following requirements:—

Gi) Moisture —
(a) Unsmoked Cheese Not more than 47.0 percent
(b) Smoked Cheese Not more than 45.0 percent
(i) Milk Fat on Dry Basis Not less than 45.0 percent

19, Extra Hard Grating Cheese means ripened cheese obtained by coagulating milk of Cow and/ or Buffalo,
goat/ sheep milk or mixtures thereof with cultures of harmless lactic acid producing bacteria, non-animal rennet, or
other suitable coagulating enzymes. It may be white to light cream in colour with a slightly brittle texture and an extra
hard rind which may be coated with vegetable oil, food grade waxes or polyfilm. It may contain food additives
permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. It shall conform to the microbiological requirements prescribed
in Appendix B. It shall conform to the following requirements:—

(i) Moisture Not more than 36.0 percent
(i) Milk Fat on Dry Basis Not less than 32.0 percent

2.1.7: DAIRY BASED DESSERTS/ CONFECTIONS

1. Ice Cream, Kulfi, Chocolate Ice Cream or Softy Ice Cream(hereafter referred to as the said product) means
the product obtained by freezing a pasteurized mix prepared from milk and /or other products derived from milk with
or without the addition of nutritive sweetening agents, fruit and fruit products, eggs and egg products, coffee,
cocoa, chocolate, condiments, spices, ginger and nuts and it may also contain bakery products such as cake or
cookies as a separate layer and/or coating. The said product may be frozen hard or frozen to a soft consistency; the
said product shall have pleasant taste and smell free from off flavour and rancidity; the said product may contain
food additives permitted in these regulation including Appendix A; the said product shall conform to the
microbiological requirements specified in Appendix B; the said product shall conform to the following requirements,
namely:—

Requirement Ice Cream Medium Fat Ice Cream Low Fat Ice Cream

(1) (2) G3) (4)

Total Solid Not less than 36.0 percent Not less than 30.0 percent Not less than 26.0 percent
Wt/Vol (gms/I) Not less than 525 Not less than 475 Not less than 475

Milk Fat Not less than 10.0 percent More than 2.5 percent but Not more than 2.5 percent

less than 10.0 percent

Milk Protein (Nx6.38) Not less than 3.5 percent Not less than 3.5 percent Not less than 3.0 percent

Note: In case where Chocolate, Cake or similar food coating, base or layer forms a separate part of the product
only the Ice Cream portion shall conform to the requirements given above. The type of ice-cream shall be clearly
indicated on the label otherwise standard for ice-cream shall apply.


298

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

2. Dried Ice Cream Mix/ Dried Frozen Dessert/ Confection(hereafter referred to as the said product) means the
product in a powder form which on addition of prescribed amount of water shall give a product conforming to the
requirements of the respective products, namely - ice cream, medium fat ice-cream, low fat ice-cream as prescribed
under regulation 2.1.7 (1) and frozen confection, medium fat frozen confection and low fat frozen confection as
prescribed under regulation 2.1.7 (3) of these regulations except the requirement of weight /volume for both the
products. The moisture content of the product shall not be more than 4.0 percent. It may contain food additives
permitted in these regulation including Appendix A. It shall conform to the microbiological requirements prescribed
in Appendix B.

3, Frozen Dessert / Frozen Confection(hereafter referred to as the said product) means the product obtained
by freezing a pasteurised mix prepared with milk fat and / or edible vegetable oils and fat having a melting point of
not more than 37.0 degree C in combination and milk protein alone or in combination / or vegetable protein products
singly or in combination with the addition of nutritive sweetening agents e.g. sugar, dextrose, fructose, liquid
glucose, dried liquid glucose, maltodextrin, high maltose corn syrup, honey, fruit and fruit products, eggs and egg
products coffee, cocoa, chocolate, condiments, spices,ginger, and nuts. The said product may also contain bakery
products such as cake or cookies as a separate layer/or coating, it may be frozen hard or frozen to a soft consistency.
It shall have pleasant taste and flavour free from off flavour and rancidityand may contain food additives permitted
in Appendix A. It shall conform to the microbiological requirements prescribed in Appendix B. It shall conform to the
following requirements:—

Requirement Frozen Dessert/ Medium Fat Frozen Dessert/ Low Fat Frozen Dessert/

Frozen Confection Frozen Confection Frozen Confection

(1)

(2) G3) (4)

Total Solid Not less than 36.0 percent Not less than 30.0 percent Not less than 26.0 percent
Wt/Vol (gms/I) Not less than 525 Not less than 475 Not less than 475
Total Fat Not less than 10.0 percent more than 2.5 percent but Not more than 2.5 percent

less than 10.0 percent

Total Protein (Nx 6.25) Not less than 3.5 percent Not less than 3.5 percent Not less than 3.0 percent

Note: In case where Chocolate, Cake or similar food coating, base or layer forms a separate part of the product only the
frozen dessert/ confection portion shall conform to the requirements given above. The type of frozen confection shall be
clearly indicated on the label otherwise, standards of frozen dessert / frozen confection shall apply and every package of
Frozen Dessert / Frozen Confection shall bear proper label declaration under regulation 2.4.5 (41) of Food Safety and
Standards (Packaging and Labeling) Regulations, 2011 .

4, Milk Ice or Milk Lolly (hereafter referred to as the said product) means the product obtained by freezing a
pasteurized mix prepared from milk and/or other products derived from milk with or without the addition of nutritive
sweetening agents, fruit and fruit products, eggs and egg products, coffee, cocoa, chocolate, condiments, spices,
ginger and nuts; the said product may also contain bakery products such as cake or cookies as a separate layer and/
or coating; the said product shall have pleasant taste and smell free from off flavour and rancidity. It may contain
food additives permitted in Appendix A; the said product shall conform to the microbiological requirements prescribed
in Appendix B; the said product shall also conform to the following requirements, namely :—

(1) _ Total solids (m/m) Not less than 20.0 percent
(2) Milk Fat (m/m) Not more than 2.0 percent
(3) Milk Protein (Nx6.38) Not less than 3.5 percent

5. Khoya by whatever variety of names it is sold such as Pindi, Danedar, Dhap, Mawa or Kava means the
product obtained from cow or buffalo or goat or sheep milk or milk solids or a combination thereof by rapid drying.
The milk fat content shall not be less than 30 percent on dry weight basis of finished product. It may contain citric
acid not more than 0.1 per cent by weight. It shall be free from added starch, added sugar and added colouring
matter.


[art II—ars 4]

FRA AT USTIA + STH 299

2.1.8: EVAPORATED/ CONDENSED MILK & MILK PRODUCTS

1, Evaporated Milk means the product obtained by partial removal of water from milk of cow and/ or buffalo by
heat or any other process which leads to a product of the same composition and characteristics. The fat and protein
content of the milk may be adjusted by addition and/ or withdrawal of milk constituents in such a way as not to alter
the whey protein to casein ratio of the milk being adjusted. It shall have pleasant taste and flavour free from off
flavour and rancidity. It shall be free from any substance foreign to milk. It may contain food additives permitted in
these regulation including Appendix A. It shall conform to the microbiological requirements prescribed in Appendix

B. It shall conform to the following requirements:—

Product Milk Fat Milk Solids Milk Protein in milk
solids not fat
(1) (2) (3) (4)

(i) Evaporated milk

(i) Evaporated partly
skimmed milk

(ii) Evaporated
skimmed milk
(iv) Evaporated high

fat milk

Not less than 8.0 percent
mm

Not less than 1.0 percent
and not more than
8.0 percent m/m

Not more than 1.0 percent
mm

Not less than 15.0 percent
mm

Not less than 26.0 percent
mm

Not less than 20.0 percent
mm

Not less than 20.0 percent
mm

Not less than 27.0 percent
mm

Not less than 34.0 percent m/m

Not less than 34.0 percent m/m

Not less than 34.0 percent m/m

Not less than 34.0 percent m/m

2. Sweetened Condensed Milk means the product obtained by partial removal of water from milk of Cow and/
or Buffalo with the addition of sugar or a combination of sucrose with other sugars or by any other process which
leads to a product of the same composition and characteristics. The fat and/ or protein content of the milk may be
adjusted by addition and / or withdrawal of milk constituents in such a way as not to alter the whey protein to casein
ratio of the milk being adjusted. It shall have pleasant taste and flavour free from off flavour and rancidity. It shall be
free from any substance foreign to milk. It may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including
Appendix A. It shall conform to the microbiological requirements prescribed in Appendix B. It shall conform to the
following requirements:—

Product Milk Fat Milk Solids Milk Protein in milk solids
not fat
(i) Sweetened condensed Not less than 9.0 percent m/m Not less than 31.0 percent Not less than 34.0 percent

Gi

=e

(iv)

milk
Sweetened condensed
skimmed milk

Sweetened condensed
partly skimmed milk

Sweetened condensed
high fat milk

Not less than 3.0 percent m/m

Not more than 1.0 percent m/m

and not more than 9.0 percent m/m

Not less than 16.0 percent m/m

m/m

Not less than 26.0 percent
m/m

Not less than 28.0 percent
m/m

Not less than 30.0 percent
m/m

m/m

Not less than 34.0 percent
m/m

Not less than 34.0 percent
m/m

Not less than 34.0 percent
m/m

3, Milk Powder - means the product obtained by partial removal of water from milk of Cow and/or Buffalo. The
fat and / or protein content of the milk may be adjusted by addition and/ or withdrawal of milk constituents in such
a way as not to alter the whey protein to casein ratio of the milk being adjusted. It shall be of uniform colour and shall
have pleasant taste and flavour free from off flavour and rancidity. It shall also be free from vegetable oil/ fat, mineral
oil, thickening agents, added flavour and sweetening agent. It may contain food additives permitted in these
regulations including Appendix A. It shall conform to the microbiological requirements prescribed in Appendix B. It
shall conform to the following requirements:—


300 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

Product Moisture Milk Fat Milk protein Titrable acidity Insolubility Total ash
in milk solids (ml 0.1N NAOH / _ index on dry
not fat 10 gm solids weight
not fat) basis
G) Wholemilk Not more than Not less than Not less than Not more than 18.0 Not more than Not more than
powder 4.0 percent m/m 26.0 percent m/m 34.0 percent m/m 2ml 7.3 percent
Gi) Partly Not more than Not less than
skimmed 5.0 percent 1.5 percentm/m Not less than Not more than Not more than Not more than
milk and not more than 34.0 percentm/m 18.0 2ml 8.2 percent
powder 26.0 percent m/m
Gii) Skimmed Not more than not more than Not less than Not more than 18.0 Not more than Not more than
milk 5.0 percent 1.5 percent m/m 34.0 percent m/m 2 ml 8.2 percent
powder

2.1.9: FOODS FOR INFANT NUTRITION

1. Infant Milk Food means the product prepared by spray drying of the milk of cow or buffalo or a mixture
thereof. The milk may be modified by the partial removal/substitution of different milk solids; carbohydrates, such
as sucrose, dextrose and dextrins/maltodextrin, maltose and lactose; salts like phosphates and citrates; vitamins A,
D, E, B Group, Vitamin C and other vitamins; and minerals like iron, copper, zinc and iodine. The source of Mineral
Salts and Vitamin Compounds may be used from:—

1. Calcium (Ca) - Calcium carbonate, Calcium chloride, Calcium citrate, Calctum phosphate monobasic,
Calcium phosphate dibasic, Calctum phosphate tribasic;

2. Phosphorous (P) - Calcium phosphate monobasic, Calcium phosphate dibasic, Calcium phosphate tribasic,
Magnesium phosphate dibasic, Potassium phosphate dibasic;

3. Chloride (CI) - Calcium chloride, Choline chloride, Magnesium chloride, Manganese chloride, Sodium
chloride, Sodium chloride iodized;

Iron (Fe) - Ferrous citrate, Ferrous lactate, Ferrous sulphate, Ferric pyrophosphate;
5. Magnesium (Mg) - Magnesium chloride, Magnesium oxide, Magnesium phosphate dibasic;

6. Sodium (Na) - Sodium bicarbonate, Sodium chloride, Sodium chloride iodized, Sodium citrate, Sodium
phosphate monobasic;

7. Potassium (K) - Potassium phosphate dibasic;

8. Copper (Cu) - Cupric citrate, Cupric sulphate;

9. Iodine (I) - Potassium iodide, Sodium iodide;

10. Zinc (Zn) - Zinc sulphate;

11. Manganese (Mn) - Manganese chloride, Manganese sulphate;

12. Vitamin A - Retinyl acetate, Retinyl palmitate, Retinyl propionate;

13. Provitamin A - Beta-carotene;

14. Vitamin D - Vitamin D2 - Ergocalciferol, Vitamin D3 - Cholecalciferol, Cholecalciferol-cholesterol;

15. Vitamin E - d-alpha-tocopherol, dl-alpha-tocopherol, d-alpha-tocopheryl acetate, dl-alpha-tocopheryl
acetate, d-alpha-tocopheryl succinate, dl-alpha-tocopheryl succinate;

16. Thiamine (Vitamin B1) - Thiamine chloride hydrochloride, Thiamine mononitrate;

17. Riboflavin (Vitamin B2) - Riboflavin, Riboflavin 5' -phosphate sodium;

18. Niacin - Nicotinamide, Nicotinic acid;

19, Vitamin B6 - Pyridoxine hydrochloride;

20. Biotin (Vitamin H) - d-biotin;

21. Folacin - Folic acid;

22. Pantothenic acid - Calcium pantothenate, Panthenol;

23. Vitamin B12 - Cyanocobalamin, Hydroxycobalamin;


[art II—ars 4]

ART AT USI 2 SATS

24.
25,
26.
27.
28.

Vitamin K - Phytylmenaquinone;

Vitamin C - Ascorbic acid, Sodium ascorbate, Calcium ascorbate, Ascorbyl-6-palmitate;

Choline - Choline bitartrate, Choline chloride;
Inositol;
Selenium - Sodium selenite.

The product shall be free of lumps and shall be uniform in appearance. It shall be free from starch and added
antioxidants. It shall also be free from dirt, extraneous matter, preservatives and added colour and flavour and from
any material which is harmful to human health. It shall not have rancid taste or musty odour. It shall not contain food

additives.

It shall conform to the following requirements, namely:—

Aw WN

Moisture, per cent by weight (not more than)

Total milk protein, per cent by weight (not less than)

Milk fat, per cent by weight (not less than)
Total ash, per cent by weight (not more than)

Ash insoluble in dilute Hydrochloric acid, per cent by weight (not more than)

Solubility:
Solubility Index maximum

Solubility per cent by weight (not less than)

Vitamin A (as retinol) pg. per 100 g. (not less than)
Added Vitamin D (expressed as Cholecalciferol or Ergocalciferol) ng per 100g.

(not less than)
Vitamin C, mg per 100 g. (not less than)

. Thiamine, wg per 100 g. (not less than)

. Riboflavin, pg per 100 g. (not less than)

. Niacin, pg per 100 g. (not less than)

. Pyridoxine pg per 100 g. (not less than)

. Folic acid, ng per 100 g. (not less than)

. Pantothenic acid, mg per 100 g. (not less than)

Vitamin B12, pg per 100 g. (not less than)
Choline, mg per 100 g. (not less than)
Vitamin K pg per 100 g. (not less than)
Biotin, pg per 100 g. (not less than)
Sodium mg per 100 g. (not less than)
Potassium, mg per 100 g. (not less than)
Chloride, mg per 100 g. (not less than)
Calcium, mg per 100 g. (not less than)
Phosphorous, mg per 100 g. (not less than)
Magnesium, mg per 100 g. (not less than)
Iron, mg per 100 g. (not less than)

Todine, pg per 100 g. (not less than)
Copper, pg per 100 g. (not less than)

Zinc, mg per 100 g. (not less than) and
not more than

Manganese, pg per 100g. (not less than)
Selenium, pg per 100 g. (not less than)

45
12.0
18.0
85
0.1

2.0ml
98.5
350 pg

45 ug
35 wg
185 pg
275 Ug
1160 pg
160 pg

20 pg
14mg

0.7 pg
32mg
18 pg
7.0 pg
90mg
370mg
250mg
230mg
115mg
22mg
5.0mg
20 pg
280 tg
2.5mg
5.0mg
20 pg
l4ug


302

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY

[Part III—Sec. 4]

32. Bacterial count, per g. (not more than) 10,000

33 Coliform count absent in 0.1 gram
34 Yeast and mould count absent in 0.1 gram
35 Salmonella and Shigella absent in 25 gram
36 E. coliabsent in 0.1 gram
37 Staphylococcus aureas absent in 0.1 gram

It shall be packed in hermetically sealed, clean and sound containers or in flexible pack made from film or
combination or any of the substrate made of Board paper, polyethylene, polyester metallised film or in such a way
to protect from deterioration.

It may be packed in nitrogen or a mixture of nitrogen and carbon dioxide.

2. Infant formula means the product prepared by spray drying of the milk of cow or buffalo or mixture thereof.
The milk may be modified by partial removal/substitution of milk fat with vegetable oils rich in polyunsaturated fatty
acids and/or by different milk solids; carbohydrates such as sucrose, dextrose and dextrins/ maltodextrin, maltose
and lactose; salts such as phosphates and citrates; vitamins A, D, E, B and C group and other vitamins; minerals
such as iron, copper, zinc and iodine and others. Vegetables oils rich in polyunsaturated fatty acids shall be added
to partially substitute milk fat to an extent that the product shall contain a minimum of 12 per cent by weight of milk
fat and a minimum of linoleate content of 1.398 g per 100 g. of the product.

The products shall also contain a minimum of 0.70 I.U. of vitamin E per 100 kcal. It may contain in addition to
the vitamins and minerals listed, other nutrients may be added when required in order to provide nutrients ordinarily

found in human milk such as,—
Carotenes

Fluorine

Amino acids
Non-protein nitrogen
Nucleotides
Carnitine
Lactalbumin
Lactoferrin
Lysozyme

10. Fucose

oO PN DM FY DS

11. Glucosamine

12. Inositol

13. Citric acid

14. Cholesterol

15. Lipid Phosphorus
16. Prostaglandins

Not less than PGF 400 mg/L

Not less than 0.25 mg/L
Not less than 0.107 mg/L
Not less than 9 mg/L (only L forms of amino acids should be used)
Not less than 173 mg/L

Not less than 11.7 mg/L
Not less than 11.27 pg/L
Not less than 1.4 g/L

Not less than 0.27 g/L

Not less than 0.8 g/L

Not less than 1.3 g/L

Not less than 0.7 g/L

Not less than 0.39 g/L
Not less than 0.35 g/L

Not less than 88 mg/L

Not less than 7 mg/L

Not less than PGE 150 mg/L

When any of these nutrients is added, the amount of these added nutrients shall be declared on the label,
which should be not less than mentioned. It may contain medium chain triglycerides, taurine, molybdenum and

chromium.

The source of Mineral Salts and Vitamin Compounds may be used from:—

(1) Calcium (Ca) - Calcium carbonate, Calcium chloride, Calcium citrate, Calctum phosphate monobasic,
Calcium phosphate dibasic, Calctum phosphate tribasic;

(2) Phosphorous (P) - Calcium phosphate monobasic, Calcium phosphate dibasic, Calcium phosphate
tribasic, Magnesium phosphate dibasic, Potasstum phosphate dibasic;


[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 303

(3)

(4)
(5)
(6)

(7)
(8)
9
(10)
(11)

Vitamins

=

BW N

Chloride (Cl) - Calcium chloride, Choline chloride, Magnesium chloride, Manganese chloride, Sodium
chloride, Sodium chloride iodized;

Iron (Fe) - Ferrous citrate, Ferrous lactate, Ferrous sulphate, Ferric pyrophosphate;
Magnesium (Mg) - Magnesium chloride, Magnesium oxide, Magnesium phosphate dibasic;

Sodium (Na) - Sodium bicarbonate, Sodium chloride, Sodium chloride iodized, Sodium citrate, Sodium
phosphate monobasic;

Potassium (K) - Potassium phosphate dibasic;
Copper (Cu) - Cupric citrate, Cupric sulphate;
Iodine (I) - Potassium iodide, Sodium iodide;
Zinc (Zn) - Zinc sulphate;

Source of Manganese (Mn) - Manganese chloride, Manganese sulphate.

. VitaminA - Retinyl acetate, Retinyl palmitate, Retinyl propionate;
. Provitamin A - Beta-carotene;
. Vitamin D - Vitamin D, - Ergocalciferol, Vitamin D, - Cholecalciferol, Cholecalciferol-cholesterol;

. Vitamin E - d-alpha-tocopherol, dl-alpha-tocopherol, d-alpha-tocopheryl acetate, dl-alpha-tocopheryl

acetate, d-alpha-tocopheryl succinate, dl-alpha-tocopheryl succinate;

. Thiamine (Vitamin B ,) - Thiamine chloride hydrochloride, Thiamin mononitrate;
. Riboflavin (Vitamin B,) - Riboflavin, Riboflavin 5' -phosphate sodium;

. Niacin - Nicotinamide, Nicotinic acid;

. Vitamin Bg - Pyridoxine hydrochloride;

. Biotin (Vitamin H) - d-biotin;

. Folacin - Folic acid;

. Pantothenic acid - Calcium pantothenate, Panthenol;

. Vitamin B,, - Cyanocobalamin, Hydroxycobalamin;

. Vitamin K - Phytylmenaquinone;

. Vitamin C - Ascorbic acid, Sodium ascorbate, Calcium ascorbate, Ascorbyl-6-palmitate;
. Choline - Choline bitartrate, Choline chloride;

. Inositol;

. Selenium - Sodium selenite.

The product shall be free of lumps and shall be uniform in appearance. It shall be free from added starch,

added colour and added flavour. It shall not have rancid taste and musty odour.

It may contain food additive listed below, —

Food Additives

Maximum level in 100 ml of the ready-to-drink product

pH - adjusting agents

Sodium hydroxide

Sodium hydrogen carbonate Limited by good

Sodium carbonate manufacturing practice and within the limits for Sodium and
Potassium Hydroxide Potassium in all types of infant formulae

Potassium hydrogen Carbonate

Potassium Carbonate

Calcium hydroxide

Sodium Citrate

Potassium Citrate


304 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

L (4) Lactic acid producing Limited by good formulae
cultures manufacturing practice in all types of infant formulae
Citric Acid
Antioxidants
Mixed tocopherols concentrate and 1 mg in all types of infant formulae
L-Ascorbyl palmitate
Mono and Diglycerides 0.4 gram
It shall conform to the following requirements namely:
1. Moisture, per cent by weight (not more than) 45
2. Total milk protein, per cent by weight (not less than) and 10.0
not more than 16.0
3. Total fat, percent by weight (not less than) 18.0
Milk Fat, percent by weight (not less than) 12.0
Linoleate per 100 gram (not less than) 1.398g
4. Total ash, per cent by weight (not more than) 8.5
Ash insoluble in dilute Hydrochloric acid, per cent by weight (not more than) 0.1
6 Solubility:
(a) Solubility Index maximum 2.0ml
(b) Solubility per cent by weight (not less than) 98.5
7. Vitamin A (as retinol) pg. per 100 g. (not less than) 350 pg
8. Added Vitamin D (expressed as Cholecalciferol or Ergocalciferol) ug. per 100g. (not less than) 45 wg
9, Vitamin C, mg per 100 g. (not less than) 35mg
10. Thiamine, pg per 100 g. (not less than) 185 pg
11. Riboflavin, pg per 100 g. (not less than) 275 pg
12. Niacin, pig per 100 g. (not less than) 1160 pg
13. Pyridoxine jig per 100 g. (not less than) 160 pg
14. Folic acid, ug per 100 g. (not less than) 20 ug
15. Pantothenic acid, mg per 100 g. (not less than) 14mg
16. Vitamin B12, pg per 100 g. (not less than) 0.7 pg
17. Choline, mg per 100 g. (not less than) 32mg
18. Vitamin K pg per 100 g. (not less than) 18 ug
19, Biotin, pg per 100 g. (not less than) 7.0 ug
20. Vitamin E (as a-tocopherol compounds) IU per 100g. (not less than) 3.151
21, Sodium mg per 100 g. (not less than) 90mg
22. Potassium, mg per 100 g. (not less than) 370mg
23. Chloride, mg per 100 g. (not less than) 250mg
24, Calcium, mg per 100 g. (not less than) 230mg
25, Phosphorous, mg per 100 g. (not less than) 115mg
26. Magnesium, mg per 100 g. (not less than) 22mg
27. Iron, mg per 100 g. (not less than) 5.0mg
28. Todine, pg per 100 g. (not less than) 20 ug

29, Copper, 1g per 100 g. (not less than) 280 pg


[FT I—eare 4] AR Hl UTA : SAT 305
30. Zinc, mg per 100 g. (not less than) and 2.5mg
not more than 5.0mg
31 Manganese, pg per 100g. (not less than) 20 ug
32, Selenium, pg per 100 g. (not less than) 14g
33. Bacterial count, per g. (not more than) 10,000
34. Coliform count absent in 0.1 gram
35. Yeast and mould count absent in 0.1 gram
36. Salmonella and Shigella absent in 25 gram
37. E. coli absent in 0.1 gram
38. Staphylococcus aureas absent in 0.1 gram

Premature/Low birth weight infant milk substitutes—

Provided that the premature/low birth weight infant milk substitutes shall also meet the following

requirement in addition to the requirements mentioned above:—

1. Protein shall be 2.25 - 2.75 gram per 100 kcal

2. Mineral contents shall not be less than 0.5 gram per 100 kcal. The Calcium: Phosphorous ratio
shall be 2:1. The Sodium, Potassium and Chloride combined together shall be not less than 40 milli

equivalent per Litre;

3, Whey: Casein ratio shall be 60:40. Essential amino acids should include taurine, cystine, tyrosine

and histidine;
Lactose free infant milk substitute
Lactose and sucrose free infant milk substitute

Sucrose free infant milk substitute

Provided that the lactose free or lactose and sucrose free or sucrose free infant milk substitutes shall
also meet the following requirement in addition to the requirements mentioned in the standard, provided that
in these three products edible vegetable oil may be used in place of milk fat and lecithin may be used as an

emulsifier:—

1. Soy protein-based, lactose-free formula shall have soy-protein and carbohydrate as glucose,

dextrose, dextrin/maltodextrin, maltose and/or sucrose;

2. Lactose-free cow's/buffalo's milk-based formulas shall have carbohydrate as glucose, dextrose,

dextrin/maltodextrin, maltose and sucrose.
Hypoallergenic infant milk substitutes

Provided that the Hypoallergenic infant milk substitutes shall also meet the following requirement in

addition to the requirements mentioned in the standard:—
1, Protein shall be hydrolyzed whey or casein or;

2. 100% free amino acids as a protein source;

It shall be packed in hermetically sealed, clean and sound containers or in flexible pack made from
film or combination or any of the substrate made of Board paper, polyethylene, polyester metallised film
or in such a way to protect from deterioration. It shall be packed in nitrogen or a mixture of nitrogen and

carbon dioxide.”

3, Milk-cereal based complementary food milk-cereal based complementary food commonly called as

weaning food or supplementary food means foods based on milk, cereal and/or legumes (pulses), soyabean,
millets, nuts and edible oil seeds, processed to low moisture content and so fragmented as to permit dilution
with water, milk or other suitable medium.

Milk-cereal based complementary food is intended to supplement the diet of infants after the age of six

months.

Milk cereal based complementary food are obtained from milk, variety of cereals, pulses, soyabean, millets,

nuts and edible oil seeds after processing. It may contain edible vegetable oils, milk solid, various carbohydrates
such as sucrose, dextrose, dextrins/ maltodextrin, maltose and lactose, calcium salts; phosphates and citrates and


306

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

other nutritionally significant minerals and vitamins. It shall contain a minimum of 10 per cent milk protein by weight
of the product. It shall also contain minimum 5 per cent milk fat by weight. It shall not contain hydrogenated fats
containing trans-fatty acids. It may contain fungal alfa amylase upto a maximum extent of 0.025 percent by weight,
fruits and vegetables, egg or egg products. It may also include amino acids such as lysine, methionine, taurine,
carnitine etc.

The source of Vitamin Compounds and Mineral Salts may be used from,—

Vitamins

1, Calcium (Ca) - Calcium carbonate, Calcium phosphate tribasic, Calcium sulphate;

2. Phosphorous (P) - Calcium phosphate tribasic;

3, Chloride (Cl) - Sodium chloride;

4, Iron (Fe) - Hydrogen reduced iron, Electrolytic iron;

5. Magnesium (Mg) - Magnesium chloride, Magnesium oxide, Magnesium phosphate dibasic;
6. Sodium (Na) - Sodium chloride;

7. Zinc (Zn) - Zinc sulphate;

1, Vitamin A - Retinyl acetate, Retinyl palmitate, Retinyl propionate;
2. Provitamin A - Beta-carotene;
3. Vitamin D - Vitamin D, -Ergocalciferol, Vitamin D, -Cholecalciferol, Cholecalciferol-cholesterol,

4, Vitamin E - d-alpha-tocopherol, dl-alpha-tocopherol, d-alpha-tocopheryl acetate, dl-alpha-tocopheryl

acetate, d-alpha-tocopheryl succinate, dl-alpha-tocopheryl succinate;

5. Thiamine (Vitamin B,) - Thiamine chloride hydrochloride, Thiamine mononitrate;
6. Riboflavin (Vitamin B,) -Riboflavin, Riboflavin 5' -phosphate sodium;

7. Niacin - Nicotinamide, Nicotinic acid;

8. Vitamin Bg - Pyridoxine hydrochloride;

9, Biotin (Vitamin H) - d-biotin;

10. Folacin - Folic acid;

11. Pantothenic acid - Calcium pantothenate, Panthenol;

12. Vitamin B,, - Cyanocobalamin, Hydroxycobalamin;

13. Vitamin K - Phytylmenaquinone;

14. Vitamin C - Ascorbic acid, Sodium ascorbate, Calcium ascorbate, Ascorbyl-6-palmitate;
15. Choline - Choline bitartrate, Choline chloride;

16. Inositol;

17. Selenium- Sodium selenite.

It shall be in the form of powder, small granules or flakes, free from lumps and shall be uniform in appearance.

It shall be free from dirt and extraneous matter and free from preservatives and added colour and flavour. It
shall be free from any material, which is harmful to human health.

It may contain the following additives, —

Emulsifiers Maximum level in 100 gm of the product on a dry weight
basis

Lecithin 1.5 gms

Mono and Diglycerides 1.5 gms

PH - adjusting agents
Sodium hydrogen carbonate

Sodium carbonate


[art II—avys 4] URI hl USA : ASAT 307

Sodium Citrate

Potassium hydrogen Carbonate

Potassium Carbonate Limited by good manufacturing practice within the limit for

Potassium Citrate sodium

Sodium Hydroxide

Calcium Hydroxide

Potassium Hydroxide

L(G) Lactic Acid

Citric Acid

Antioxidants

Mixed tocopherols concentrate 300 mg /kg fat, singly or in combination

co- Tocopherol

L-Ascorbyl Palmitate 200mg /kg fat

It shall conform to the following requirements, namely:—
1. Moisture, per cent by weight (not more than) 5.0
2. Total protein, per cent by weight (not less than) 15.0
3. Fat, per cent by weight (not less than) 75
4. Total Carbohydrate, per cent by weight (not less than) 55.0
5. Total ash, per cent by weight (not more than) 5.0
6. Ash insoluble in dilute Hydrochloric acid, per cent by weight (not more than) 0.1
7. Crude fibre (on dry basis) per cent by weight (not more than) 10
8. Vitamin A (as retinol) ug per 100 g. (not less than) 350 pg
9, Added Vitamin D, pg per 100 g. (expressed as Cholecalciferol or Ergocalciferol (not less than) 5 wg
10. Vitamin C, mg per 100 g. (not less than) 25 mg
11. Thiamine (as hydrochloride), mg per 100 g. (not less than) 0.5 mg
12. Riboflavin, mg per 100 g. (not less than) 0.3 mg
13. Niacin, mg per 100 g. (not less than) 3.0mg
14. Folic acid pg per 100 g. (not less than) 20 ug
15. Iron, mg per 100 g. (not less than) 5.0mg
16. Zinc mg per 100 g. (not less than) 2.5 mg

and not more than 5.0mg

17. Bacterial count, per g. (not more than) 10,000
18. Coliform count absent in 0.1 gram
19. Yeast and mould count absent in 0.1 gram
20. Salmonella and Shigella absent in 25 gram
21. E.coli absent in 0.1 gram
22. Staphylococcus aureas absent in 0.1 gram

It shall be packed in hermetically sealed, clean and sound containers or in flexible pack made from film
or combination or any of the substrate made of Board paper, polyethylene, polyester metallised film or in such

a way to protect from deterioration.


308

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

4, Processed cereal based complementary food commonly called as weaning food or supplementary food
means foods based on cereal and/or legumes (pulses), soyabean, millets, nuts and edible oil seeds, processed to low
moisture content and so fragmented as to permit dilution with water, milk or other suitable medium.

Processed cereal based complementary food are intended to supplement the diet of infants after the age of six
months and up to the age of two years.

Processed cereal based complementary food are obtained from variety of cereals, pulses, soyabean, millets,
nuts and edible oil seeds after processing. It shall contain milled cereal and legumes combined not less than 75
percent. Where the product is intended to be mixed with water before consumption, the minimum content of protein
shall not be less than 15% ona dry weight basis and the PER shall not be less than 70% of that of casein. The sodium
content of the products shall not exceed 100 mg/100 gram of the ready-to-eat product.

Hydrogenated fats containing trans-fatty acids shall not be added to the products. It may also contain
following ingredients: - protein concentrates, essential amino acids (only natural L forms of amino acids shall be
used), iodized salt; milk and milk products; eggs; edible vegetable oils and fats; fruits and vegetables; various
carbohydrates such as sucrose, dextrose, dextrin, maltose dextrin, lactose, honey, corn syrup; malt; potatoes.

The source of Vitamin Compounds and Mineral Salts may be used from,—

Calcium (Ca) - Calcium carbonate, Calcium phosphate tribasic, Calcium sulphate;
Phosphorous (P) - Calcium phosphate tribasic, Phosphoric acid;

Chloride (Cl) - Sodium chloride, Hydrochloric acid;

Iron (Fe) - Hydrogen reduced iron, Electrolytic iron;

Sodium (Na) - Sodium chloride;

Zinc (Zn) - Zinc acetate, Zinc chloride, Zinc oxide, Zinc sulphate;

AMF WN

Vitamins
Vitamin A - Retinyl acetate, Retinyl palmitate, Retinyl propionate;
Provitamin A - Beta-carotene;

Vitamin D - Vitamin D, - Ergocalciferol, Vitamin D, - Cholecalciferol, Cholecalciferol-cholesterol,

WN

Vitamin E - d-alpha-tocopherol, dl-alpha-tocopherol, d-alpha-tocopheryl acetate, dl-alpha-
tocopheryl acetate, d-alpha-tocopheryl succinate, dl-alpha-tocopheryl succinate;

Thiamine (Vitamin B,) - Thiamine chloride hydrochloride, Thiamine mononitrate;
Riboflavin (Vitamin B.,) - Riboflavin, Riboflavin 5'-phosphate sodium;

Niacin - Nicotinamide, Nicotinic acid;

Vitamin B¢ - Pyridoxine hydrochloride;

Biotin (Vitamin H) - d-biotin;

10. Folacin - Folic acid;

eo PF Nn

11. Pantothenic acid - Calcium pantothenate, Panthenol;
12, Vitamin B,, - Cyanocobalamin, Hydroxycobalamin;
13. Vitamin K - Phytylmenaquinone;
14. Vitamin C - Ascorbic acid, Sodium ascorbate, Calcium ascorbate, Ascorbyl-6-palmitate;
15. Choline - Choline bitartrate, Choline chloride;
16. Inositol;
17. Selenium- Sodium selenite.
It shall be in the form of powder, small granules or flakes, free from lumps and shall be uniform in appearance.

All ingredients, including optional ingredients, shall be clean, safe, suitable and of good quality. It shall be
free from preservatives, added colour and flavour.

It may contain the following food additives:—


[art II—ars 4]

FRA AT USTIA + STH 309

Name of the Food Additives

Maximum Level in a 100 g of Product on a dry weight basis

Emulsifiers

Lecithin 1.5 gram
Mono and Diglycerides 1.5 gram
pH Adjusting Agents

Sodium hydrogen carbonate

Limited by good manufacturing practice and within the limits for
sodium

Potassium hydrogen carbonate

Limited by good manufacturing practice

Calcium carbonate}

LG) lactic acid 1.5 gm
Citric acid 2.5 gm
Antioxidants

Mixed tocopherols concentrate
Alpha-tocopherol

L-Ascorbyl palmitate

L-Ascorbic acid and its sodium and

potassium salts

300 mg/kg fat, singly or in combination

200 mg/kg fat

50 mg, expressed as ascorbic acid and within limits for sodium

Enzymes
Malt carbohydrates

Limited by good manufacturing practice

Leavening Agents

Ammonium carbonate}

Ammonium hydrogen carbonate}

Limited by good manufacturing practice

It shall also conform to the following requirements namely:—

Coe FNNDMW FKP NY

. Yeast and mould count absent in

Moisture, per cent by weight (not more than) 40
Total protein, per cent by weight (not less than) 15.0
Total Carbohydrate, per cent by weight (not less than) 55.0
Total ash, per cent by weight (not more than) 5.0
Ash insoluble in dilute Hydrochloric acid, per cent by weight (not more than) 0.1 0.1
Crude fibre (on dry basis) per cent by weight (not more than) 10
Vitamin A (as retinol) wg per 100 g. (not less than) 350 pg
Added Vitamin D, pg per 100 g. (expressed as Cholecalciferol or Ergocalciferol (not less than) 5 ug
Vitamin C, mg per 100 g. (not less than) 25 mg
. Thiamine (as hydrochloride), mg per 100 g. (not less than) 0.5 mg
. Riboflavin, mg per 100 g. (not less than) 0.3 mg
. Niacin, mg per 100 g. (not less than) 3.0mg
. Folic acid pg per 100 g. (not less than) 20.0 ug
. Iron, mg per 100 g. (not less than) 5.0mg
. Zinc mg per 100 g. (not less than) 2.5 mg
and not more than 5.0mg
. Bacterial count, per g. (not more than) 10,000
. Coliform count absent in 0.1 gram

0.1 gram


310

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

19. Salmonella and Shigella absent in 25 gram
20. E. coli absent in 0.1 gram
21. Staphylococcus aureas absent in 0.1 gram

It shall be packed in hermetically sealed clean and sound containers or in flexible pack made from film or
combination of any or the substrate made of board paper, polyethylene, polyester, metalised film or aluminum foil in
such a way to protect from deterioration.”

5. Follow-Up Formula-Complementary Food" means the product prepared by spray drying of the milk of cow
or buffalos or mixture thereof. It may contain vegetable protein. Follow-up formula based on milk shall be prepared
from ingredients mentioned below except that a minimum of 3 gram per 100 available Calories (or 0.7 gram per 100
kilojoules) of protein shall be derived from whole or skimmed milk as such, or with minor modification that does not
substantially impair the vitamin or mineral content of the milk and which represents a minimum of 90% of the total
protein.

Follow-up formula for use as a liquid part of the complementary diet for infants after the age of six months and
up to the age of two years when prepared in accordance with the instructions for use, 100 ml of the ready-for-
consumption product shall provide not less than 60 kcal (or 250 kJ) and not more than 85 kcal (or 355 kJ).

Follow-up formula shall contain the following nutrients indicated below,
(1) Protein- Notlessthan3.0 gram per 100 available calories (or 0.7 gram per 100 available kilojoules).
Not more than 5.5 g per 100 available calories (or 1.3 g per 100 available kilojoules).

(Protein shall be of nutritional quality equivalent to that of casein or a greater quantity of other protein in
inverse proportion to its nutritional quality. The quality of the protein shall not be less than 85% of that of casein).

Essential amino acids may be added to follow-up formula to improve its nutritional value. Only L forms of
amino acids shall be used.

(2) Fat- Not less than 4 g per 100 Calories (0.93 gram per 100 available kilojoules)
Not more than 6 gram per 100 calories (1.4 gram per 100 available kilojoules)
Linoleic acid (in the form of glyceride) - Not less than 310 mg
(per 100 Calories or 74.09 mg per 100 available Kj)

The products shall contain nutritionally available carbohydrates suitable for the feeding of the older
infant and young child in such quantities as to adjust the product to the energy density in accordance with
the requirements given above.

It may also contain other nutrients when required to ensure that the product is suitable to form part of
a mixed feeding scheme intended for use after six months of age. When any of these nutrients is added, the
food shall contain not less than Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDA) amounts of these nutrients.

The source of Mineral Salts and Vitamin Compounds may be used from, —

1. Calcium (Ca)-Calcium carbonate, Calcium chloride, Calcium citrate, Calctum phosphate monobasic,
Calcium phosphate dibasic, Calcium phosphate tribasic;

2. Phosphorous (P)- Calcium phosphate monobasic, Calcium phosphate dibasic, Calcium phosphate
tribasic, Magnesium phosphate dibasic, Potasstum phosphate dibasic;

3. Chloride (Cl)-Calcium chloride, Choline chloride, Magnesium chloride, Manganese chloride,
Sodium chloride, Sodium chloride iodized;

4. Iron (Fe)- Ferrous citrate Ferrous lactate, Ferrous sulphate, Ferric pyrophosphate;
Magnesium (Mg)- Magnesium chloride, Magnesium oxide, Magnesium phosphate dibasic;

6. Sodium (Na)- Sodium bicarbonate, Sodium chloride, Sodium chloride iodized, Sodium citrate,
Sodium phosphate monobasic;

7. Potassium (K)- Potassium phosphate dibasic;
8. Copper (Cu)- Cupric citrate, Cupric sulphate;

9. — Jodine (I)-Potassium iodide, Sodium iodide;


[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 311

10. Zinc (Zn)- Zinc sulphate;

11. Source of Manganese (Mn)- Manganese chloride, Manganese sulphate.

Vitamins
Vitamin A - Retinyl acetate, Retinyl palmitate, Retinyl propionate;
Provitamin A - Beta-carotene;

Vitamin D - Vitamin D, - Ergocalciferol, Vitamin D, - Cholecalciferol, Cholecalciferol-cholesterol;

FY N

VitaminE-d-alpha-tocopherol, dl-alpha-tocopherol, d-alpha-tocopheryl acetate, dl-alpha-tocopheryl
acetate, d-alpha-tocopheryl succinate, dl-alpha-tocopheryl succinate;

Thiamine (Vitamin B,) - Thiamine chloride hydrochloride, Thiamine mononitrate;
Riboflavin (Vitamin B.,) - Riboflavin, Riboflavin 5'-phosphate sodium;
Niacin-Nicotinamide, Nicotinic acid;

Vitamin B¢ - Pyridoxine hydrochloride;

Biotin (Vitamin H) - d-biotin;

eo PND MN

10. Folacin - Folic acid;

11. Pantothenic acid - Calcium pantothenate, Panthenol;

12. Vitamin B,, - Cyanocobalamin, Hydroxycobalamin;

13. Vitamin K - Phytylmenaquinone;

14. Vitamin C - Ascorbic acid, Sodium ascorbate, Calcium ascorbate, Ascorbyl-6-palmitate;
15. Choline - Choline bitartrate, Choline chloride;

16. Inositol;

17. Selenium - Sodium selenite.

The product shall be free of lumps and shall be uniform in appearance. It shall be free from added starch and
added colour and flavour. It shall not have rancid taste and musty odour.

It may contain the following additives, —

Maximum Level in 100 ml of Product Ready-for-Consumption

pH-Adjusting Agents

Sodium hydrogen carbonate

Sodium carbonate

Sodium citrate

Potassium hydrogen carbonate

Potassium carbonate

Potassium citrate Limited by good Manufacturing Practice within the limit for
Sodium hydroxide sodium
Calcium hydorxide

Potassium hydroxide

LG) Lactic acid

Citric acid

Antioxidants

Mixed tocopherols concentrate
a - Tocopherol 3 mg singly or in combination

L-Ascorbyl palmitate 5 mg singly or in combination.



312 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]
It shall also conform to the following requirements,—
S. No. Characteristics Requirements
1. Moisture, per cent by weight (not more than) 45
2. Total milk protein, per cent by weight (not less than) and 13.5
(not more than) 24.75
3. Total fat, per cent by weight (not less than) and 18.0
(not more than) 27.0
Linoleate per 100 gm (not less than) 1.398
4. Total ash, per cent by weight (not more than) 8.5
5. Ash insoluble in dilute Hydrochloric acid, per cent by weight (not more than) 0.1
6. Solubility:
Solubility Index maximum 2.0m.
Solubility per cent by weight (not less than) 98.5
7. Vitamin A (as retinol) wg per 100 g. (not less than) 350 pg
8. Added Vitamin D (expressed as Cholecalciferol or Ergocalciferol)
pg per 100 g. (not less than) 45 wg
9, Vitamin C, mg per 100 g. (not less than) 36mg
10. Thiamin, mcg per 100 g. (not less than) 180 pg
11. Riboflavin, pg per 100 g. (not less than) 270 pg
12. Niacin, pig per 100 g. (not less than) 1125p1g
13. Pyridoxine pg per 100 g. (not less than) 202.50 pg
14. Folic acid, ug per 100 g. (not less than) 20.0 ug
15. Pantothenic acid, mg per 100 g. (not less than) 1.35mg
16. Vitamin B12, pg per 100 g. (not less than) 0.6752
17. Choline, mg per 100 g. (not less than) 32mg
18. Vitamin K pg per 100 g. (not less than) 18pg
19, Biotin, pg per 100 g. (not less than) 6.75 pg
20. Vitamin E (as a- tocopherol compounds) I.U. per 100g (not less than) 3.151
21, Sodium, mg per 100 g. (not less than) 90mg
22. Potassium, mg per 100 g. (not less than) 360mg
23. Chloride, mg per 100 g. (not less than) 247.50 mg
24, Calcium, mg per 100 g. (not less than) 405 mg
25, Phosphorous, mg per 100 g. (not less than) 270mg
26. Magnesium, mg per 100 g. (not less than) 27mg
27. Iron, mg per 100 g. (not less than) 5mg
28. Todine, pg per 100 g. (not less than) 22.50Lg
29, Copper, 1g per 100 g. (not less than) 280g
30. Zinc, mg per 100 g. (not less than) and 2.5mg
(not more than) 5.0mg
31, Manganese, pg per 100 g. (not less than) 20pg
32. Selenium, pg per 100 g. (not less than) 14g
33. Bacterial count, per g. (not more than) 10,000
34, Coliform count absent in 0.1gram
35, Yeast and mould count absent in 0.1gram
36. Salmonella and Shigella absent in 25 gram
37. E. coli absent in 0.1gram
38. Staphylococcus aureas absent in 0.1gram



[art

Ill—azs 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 313

It shall be packed in hermetically sealed, clean and sound containers or in flexible pack made from film or
combination or any of the substrate made of Board paper, polyethylene, polyester metallised film or in such a way
to protect from deterioration. It shall be packed in nitrogen or a mixture of nitrogen and carbon dioxide.

2.1.10: BUTTER, GHEE & MILK FATS

1. Butter means the fatty product derived exclusively from milk of Cow and/or Buffalo or its products principally
in the form of an emulsion of the type water-in-oil. The product may be with or without added common salt and
starter cultures of harmless lactic acid and / or flavour producing bacteria. Table butter shall be obtained from
pasteurised milk and/ or other milk products which have undergone adequate heat treatment to ensure microbial
safety. It shall be free from animal, body fat, vegetable oil and fat, mineral oil and added flavour. It shall have pleasant
taste and flavour free from off flavour and rancidity. It may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations
including Appendix A. It shall conform to the microbiological requirements prescribed in Appendix B.

Provided that where butter is sold or offered for sale without any indication as to whether it is table or desi
butter, the standards of table butter shall apply.

It shall conform to the following requirements:

Product Moisture Milk Fat Milk solids not Fat Commonsalt
Table Not more than Not less than Not more than 1.5 Not more than 3.0
Butter 16.0 percent m/m 80.0 percent m/m percent m/m percent m/m

Desi - Not less than

Cooking

Butter 76.0 percent m/m - —

2. Ghee means the pure clarified fat derived solely from milk or curd or from desi (cooking) butter or from cream
to which no colouring matter or preservative has been added. The standards of quality of ghee produced in a State
or Union Territory specified in column 2 of the Table below shall be as specified against the said State or Union
Territory in the corresponding Columns 3,4,5 and 6 of the said Table.

S. | Name of the State/ Butyro Minimum Percentage of
No. Union Territory Refractometer Reichert FFA as oleic Moisture (Max.)
reading at 40°C Value acid (max.)

(1) (2) G3) (4) (5) (6)
1. Andhra Pradesh 40.0 to 43.0 24 3 0.5
2. Andaman & Nicobar Islands 41.0 to 44.0 24 3 0.5
3. Arunachal Pradesh 40.0 to 43.0 26 3 0.5
4. Assam 40.0 to 43.0 26 3 0.5
5. Bihar 40.0 to 43.0 28 3 0.5
6. Chandigarh 40.0 to 43.0 28 3 0.5
7. Chattisgarh 40.0 to 44.0 26 3 0.5
8. Dadra and Nagar haveli 40.0 to 43.0 24 3 0.5
9. Delhi 40.0 to 43.0 28 3 0.5
10. Goa 40.0 to 43.0 26 3 0.5
11. Daman & Diu 40.0 to 43.5 24 3 0.5
12. Gujarat

a) Areas other than cotton 40.0 to 43.5 24 3 0.5

tract areas
b) Cotton tract areas 41.5 to 45.0 21 3 0.5



314 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

(1) (2) G3) (4) (5) (6)
13. Haryana
a) Areas other than cotton 40.0 to 43.0 28 3 0.5
tract areas
b) Cotton tract areas 40.0 to 43.0 26 3 0.5
14. Himachal Pradesh 40.0 to 43.0 26 3 0.5
15. Jammu & Kashmir 40.0 to 43.0 26 3 0.5
16. Jharkhand 40.0 to 43.0 28 3 0.5
17. Karnataka
a) Areas other than Belgaum district 40.0 to 43.0 24 3 05
b) Belgaum district 40.0 to 44.0 26 3 0.5
18. Kerela 40.0 to 43.0 26 3 0.5
19. Lakshwadeep 40.0 to 43.0 26 3 0.5
20. Madhya Pradesh
a) Areas other than cotton 40.0 to 44.0 26 3 0.5
tract areas
b) Cotton tract areas 41.5 to 45.0 21 3 0.5
21. Maharashtra
a) Areas other than cotton 40.0 to 43.0 26 3 0.5
tract areas
b) Cotton tract areas 41.5 to 45.0 21 3 0.5
22. Manipur 40.0 to 43.0 26 3 0.5
23. Meghalya 40.0 to 43.0 26 3 0.5
24, Mizoram 40.0 to 43.0 26 3 0.5
25. Nagaland 40.0 to 43.0 26 3 0.5
26. Orisssa 40.0 to 43.0 26 3 0.5
27. Pondicherry 40.0 to 44.0 26 3 0.5
28. Punjab 40.0 to 43.0 28 3 0.5
29. Rajasthan
a) Areas other than 40.0 to 43.0 26 3 0.5
Jodhpur District
b) Jodhpur district 41.5 to 45.0 21 3 0.5
30. Tamil Nadu 41.0 to 44.0 24 3 0.5
31. Tripura 40.0 to 43.0 26 3 0.5
32. Uttar Pradesh 40.0 to 43.0 26 3 0.5
33. Uttarakhand 40.0 to 43.0 26 3 0.5
34. West Bengal
a) Areas other than Bishnupur 40.0 to 43.0 28 3 0.5
sub division
b) Bishnupur sub division 41.5 to 45.0 21 3 0.5
34, Sikkim 40.0 to 43.0 28 3 0.5

(Baudouin test shall be negative)

Explanation.-By cotton tract is meant the areas in the States where cotton seed is extensively fed to the cattle
and so notified by the State Government concerned.


[art II—ars 4]

FRA AT USTIA + STH 315

3. Milkfat / Butter oil and Anhydrous Milk fat / Anhydrous Butter oil means the fatty products derived
exclusively from milk and/ or products obtained from milk by means of process which result in almost total removal
of water and milk solids not fat. It shall have pleasant taste and flavour free from off odour and rancidity. It shall be
free from vegetable oil/ fat, animal body fat, mineral oil, added flavour and any other substance foreign to milk. It may
contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. It shall conform to the microbiological
requirements prescribed in Appendix B. It shall conform to the following requirements:—

Requirements Milk fat/Butter Oil Anhydrous milk fat/ Anhydrous Butter Oil
(i) B.Rreading at 40°C 40-44 40-44
(i) Moisture m/m Not more than 0.4 percent Not more than 0.1 percent
(ii) Milk Fat m/m Not less than 99.6 percent Not less than 99.8 percent
(iv) Reichert Value Not less than 24 Not less than 24
(v) F.F.Aas oleic acid Not more than 0.4 percent Not more than 0.3 percent
(vi) Peroxide Value (milli eqvt of Not more than 0.6 percent Not more than 0.3 percent
Oxygen/ Kg fat)
(vii) Boudouins Test Negative Negative

2.1.11: CHAKKA AND SHRIKHAND

1, Chakka-means a white to pale yellow semi-solid product of good texture and uniform consistency obtained
by draining off the whey from the Yoghurt obtained by the lactic fermentation of cow's milk, buffalo's milk, skimmed
milk and recombined or standardised milk which has been subjected to minimum heat treatment equivalent to that of
pasteurisation. It shall have pleasant Yoghurt/Dahi like flavour. It shall not contain any ingredient foreign to milk. It
shall be free from mouldness and free from signs of fat or water seepage or both. It shall be smooth and it shall not
appear dry. It shall not contain extraneous colour and flavours. It shall conform to the following requirements,
namely :—

Requirements Chakka Skimmed Milk Full Cream
Chakka Chakka
1. Total solids, per cent by weight Min. 30 Min.20 Min.28
2. Milk fat (on dry basis) per cent by weight Min.33 Max. 5 Min. 38
3. Milk protein ( on dry basis) per cent by weight Min.30 Min.60 Min.30
4. Titrable acidity (as lactic acid) percent by Weight Max.2.5 Max.2.5 Max.2.5
5. Total Ash ( on dry basis) percent by weight Max.3.5 Max.5.0 Max. 3.5;

Chakka when sold without any indication shall conform to the standards of Chakka.

2. Shrikhand-means the product obtained from chakka or Skimmed Milk Chakka to which milk fat is added. It
may contain fruits, nuts, sugar, cardamom, saffron and other spices. It shall not contain any added colouring and
artificial flavouring substances. It shall conform to the following specifications, namely:—

Requirements Shrikhand Full Cream Shrikhand

1. Total solids, per cent by weight

2. Milk fat (on dry basis) per cent by weight

3. Milk protein ( on dry basis) per cent by weight
(for Fruit Shrikhand- Not less than...... 6.0)

4. Titrable acidity ( as lactic acid) percent by weight

5. Sugar (sucrose)( on dry basis) per cent by weight
6. Total Ash ( on dry basis) percent by

weight

Not less than...58
Not less than...8.5
Not less than...9

Not more than ....1.4
Not more than... 72.5

Not more than ....0.9

Not less than...58
Not less than...10
Not less than...7

Not more than ....1.4
Not more than... 72.5

Not more than ....0.9.



316

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

In case of Fruits Shrikhand it shall contain Milk fat (on dry basis) per cent by weight... Not less than 7.0 and
Milk Protein (on dry basis) per cent by weight... Not less than 9.0.

2.1.12: FERMENTED MILK PRODUCTS

1. Yoghurt means a coagulated product obtained from pasteurised or boiled milk or concentrated milk, pasteurised
skimmed milk and /or pasteurised cream or a mixture of two or more of these products by lactic acid fermentation
through the action of Lactobacillus bulgaricus and Steptococcus thermophilus. It may also contain cultures of
Bifidobacterium bifidus and Lactobacillus acidophilus and other cultures of suitable lactic acid producing harmless
bacteria and if added a declaration to this effect shall be made on the label. The microorganisms in the final product
must be viable and abundant. It may contain milk powder, skimmed milk powder, unfermented buttermilk, concentrated
whey, whey powder, whey protein, whey protein concentrate, water soluble milk proteins, edible casein, and caseinates
manufactured from pasteurised products. It may also contain sugar, corn syrup or glucose syrup in sweetened,
flavoured and fruit yoghurt or fruits in fruits yoghurt. It shall have smooth surface and thick consistency without
separation of whey. It shall be free from vegetable oil/ fat, animal body fat, mineral oil and any other substance
foreign to milk. The product may contain food additives permitted in these regulation including Appendix A. It shall
conform to the microbiological requirements prescribed in Appendix B. It shall conform to the following
requirements:—

Product Milk Fat Milk solids not fat Milk protein Sugar
() Yoghurt Not less than 3.0 Not less than 8.5 Not less than 3.2 -
percent m/m percent m/m percent m/m
(ii) Partly Not less than0.5 = Not less than 8.5 Not less than 3.2 -
skimmed percent m/m & percent m/m percent m/m
Yoghurt Not more than
3.0 percent m/m
(iii) Skimmed Not more than Not less than 8.5 Not less than 3.2 -
Yoghurt 0.5 percent m/m percent m/m percent m/m
(iv) Sweetened Notlessthan3.0 Not less than 8.5 Not less than 3.2 Not less than 6.0
Flavoured —_ percent m/m percent m/m percent m/m percent m/m
Yoghurt
(v) Fruit Not less than 1.5 Not less than 8.5 Not less than 2.6 Not less than 6.0
Yoghurt percent m/m percent m/m percent m/m percent m/m

Provided that Titrable acidity as lactic acid shall not be less than 0.85 percent and not more than 1.2 percent.
The specific lactic acid producing bacterial count per gram shall not be less than 10,00,000. Provided further that the
type of Yoghurt shall be clearly indicated on the label otherwise standards of plain Yoghurt shall apply. The Yoghurt
subjected to heat treatment after fermentation at temperature not less than 65 degree C shall be labelled as Thermised
or Heat Treated Yoghurt and shall conform to the above parameters except the minimum requirement of specific
lactic acid producing count per gram.

2.1.13: WHEY PRODUCTS

1. Whey Powder means the product obtained by spray or roller drying sweet whey or acid whey from which
major portion of milk fat has been removed. Sweet Whey means the fluid separated from the curd after the coagulation
of milk, cream, skimmed milk or buttermilk in the manufacture of cheese, casein or similar products, principally with
non-animal rennet type enzymes.

Acid Whey is obtained after coagulation of milk, cream, skimmed milk or buttermilk, principally with acids of
the types used for manufacture of edible acid casein, chhana, paneer, or fresh cheese. It shall be of uniform colour
with pleasant taste and flavour free from off flavour and rancidity. It may contain food additives permitted in these
regulation including Appendix A. It shall conform to the microbiological requirements prescribed in Appendix B. It
shall conform to the following requirements:—


[art II—ars 4]

ART AT USI 2 SATS

317

Requirements

Whey Powder

Acid Whey Powder

(i) Moisture
(ii) Milk Fat
(iti) Milk Protein (N x 6.38)
(iv) Total Ash
(v) pH (in 10.0% solution)

(vi) Lactose content

Not more than 5.0 percent

Not more than 2.0 percent m/m
Not less than 10.0 percent m/m
Not more than 9.5 percent m/m
Not less than 5.1

Not less than 61.0 percent m/m

Not more than 4.5 percent

Not more than 2.0 percent m/m
Not less than 7.0 percent m/m
Not more than 15.0 percent m/m
Not more than 5.1

Not less than 61.0 percent m/m

expressed as anhydrous
Lactose

Note: (@ Although the powders may contain both anhydrous lactose and lactose monohydrates, the lactose
content is expressed as anhydrous lactose.

(i) 100 parts of lactose monohydrate contain 95 parts of anhydrous lactose.

2.1.14: EDIBLE CASEIN PRODUCTS

1, Edible Casein Products mean the products obtained by separating, washing and drying the coagulum of
skimmed milk.

2. Edible acid casein means the product obtained by separating, washing and drying the acid precipitated
coagulum of skimmed milk.

3. Edible non-animal rennet casein means the product obtained after washing and drying the coagulum
remaining after separating the whey from the skimmed milk which has been coagulated by non-animal rennet or by
other coagulating enzymes

4, Edible caseinate means the dry product obtained by reaction of edible casein or fresh casein curd with food
grade neutralising agents and which have been subjected to an appropriate heat treatment. It shall be qualified by
the name of the cation and the drying process used (Spray or Roller dried).

The products shall be white to pale cream or have greenish tinge; free from lumps and any unpleasant foreign
flavour, it may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. It shall conform to the
microbiological requirements prescribed in Appendix B. It shall conform to the following requirements:—

Requirements Non-animal rennet Casein Acid Casein Caseinate
G) Moisture Not more than 12.0 percent m/m Not more than 12.0 percent m/m Not more than 8.0 percent m/m
Gi) Milk Fat Not more than 2.0 percent m/m Not more than 2.0 percent m/m Not more than 2.0 percent m/m
Gii) Milk Protein Not less than 84.0 percent m/m _—_Not less than 90.0 percent m/m _— Not less than 88.0 percent mm
(Nx6.38) on dry
weight basis
(iv) Casein in Protein Not less than 95.0 percent m/m Not less than 95.0 percent m/m _Not less than 95.0 percent m/m
(vy) AshincludingP,O, Not less than 7.5 percent m/m Not more than 2.5 percent m/m —
(vi) Lactose Not more than 1.0 percentm/m Not more than 1.0 percentm/m Not more than 1.0 percent m/m
(vii) Free fatty Acid - Not more than 0.27 percent -

(viii) pH Value in 10% - -

ml1/0.1N NaOH/gm

Not more than 8.0
solution

2.2:

FATS, OILS AND FAT EMULSIONS

2.2.1 OILS:

1. Coconut oil (naryal ka tel) means the oil expressed from copra obtained from the kernel of Cocos mucifera
nuts. It shall be clear and free from rancidity, suspended or other foreign matter, separated water, added colouring or
flavouring substances, or mineral oil. It shall conform to the following standards:—


318

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

Butyro-refractometer

reading at 40°C. 34.0 to 35.5

OR
Refractive Index at 40°C 1.4481-1.4491
Saponification value Not less than 250
Iodine value 7.5 to 10.
Polenske Value Not less than 13
Unsaponifiable matter Not more than 1.0 per cent.
Acid value Not more than 6.0.

Test for argemone oil shall be negative.
However, it may contain food additives permitted in these regulations and appendices

Further, if the oil is obtained by the method of solvent extraction and the oil imported into India whether
obtained by solvent extraction or otherwise, it shall be supplied for human consumption only after refining and shall
conform to the standards laid down under regulation 2.2.1 (16). The oil so refined shall not contain Hexane more than
5.00 ppm.

2. Cotton seed oil (binola ka tel) means the oil extracted from clean, sound delinted and decorticated cotton
seeds (genus Gossypium). It shall be refined. It shall be clear, free from rancidity, suspended or other foreign matter,
separated water, added colouring or flavouring substances or mineral oil. It shall conform to the following standards:—

Butyro-refractometer

reading at 40°C. 55.6 to 60.2
OR
Refractive Index at 40°C 1.4630-1.4660
Saponification value 190 to 198
Iodine value 98 to 112.
Unsaponifiable matter Not more than 1.5 per cent.
Acid value Not more than 0.50
There shall be no turbidity after keeping the filtered sample at 30°C for 24 hours
Bellier Test (Turbidity temperature- 19.0°C -21.0°C
Acetic acid method)

Test for Argemone oil shall be negative

However, it may contain food additives permitted in these regulations and appendices

Further, if the oil is obtained by the method of solvent extraction and the oil imported into India whether
obtained by solvent extraction or otherwise, it shall be supplied for human consumption only after refining and shall
conform to the standards laid down under regulation 2.2.1 (16). the oil so refined shall not contain hexane more than
5.00 ppm.

3. Groundnut oil (moongh-phali-ka tel) means the oil expressed from clean and sound groundnuts (Arachis
hypogoes). It shall be clear, free from rancidity, suspended or other foreign matter, separated water added colouring
or flavouring substances or mineral oil. It shall conform to the following standards:—

Butyro-refractometer

reading at 40°C 54.0 to 57.1
Or

Refractive Index at 40°C 1.4620-1.4640

Saponification value 188 to 196

Jodine value 85 to 99.


[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 319

Unsaponifiable matter Not more than 1.0 per cent.
Acid value Not more than 6.0

Bellier test (Turbidity temperature
Acetic acid method) 39°C to 41°C

Test for argemone oil shall be negative.
However, it may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices

Further, if the oil is obtained by the method of solvent extraction and the oil imported into India whether
obtained by solvent extraction or otherwise, it shall be supplied for human consumption only after refining and shall
conform to the standards laid down under regulation 2.2.1 (16). The oil so refined shall not contain Hexane more than
5.00 ppm.

4, Linseed oil (tili ka tel) means the oil obtained by process of expressing clean and sound linseed (linum
usitatissimum). it shall be clear, free from rancidity, suspended or other foreign matter, separated water, added
colouring or flavouring substance, or mineral oil. It shall conform to the following standards:—

Butyro-refractometer

reading at 40 oC 69.5-74.3

Or
Refractive Index at 40°C 1.4720-1.4750
Saponification value 188 to 195
Iodine value Not less than 170
Unsaponifiable matter Not more than 1.5 per cent.
Acid value Not more than 4.0

Test for argemone oil shall be negative.
However, it may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices

Further, if the oil is obtained by the method of solvent extraction and the oil imported into India whether
obtained by solvent extraction or otherwise, it shall be supplied for human consumption only after refining and shall
conform to the standards laid down under regulation 2.2.1 (16). the oil so refined shall not contain hexane more than
5.00 ppm.

5. Mahua oil means the oil expressed from clean and sound seeds or nuts of Madhuca (Bassi latifolia or B.
longifolia or a mixture of both). It shall be clear and shall be free from rancidity, suspended or other foreign matter,
separated water, added colouring or flavouring substances, or mineral oil. It shall be refined and shall conform to the
following standards:—

Butyro-refractometer

reading at 40°C 49.5 to 52.7

Or
Refractive Index at 40°C 1.4590 - 1.4611
Saponification value 187 to 196
Iodine value 58 to 70
Unsaponifiable matter Not more than 2.0 per cent
Acid value Not more than 0.50

Test for argemone oil shall be negative
However, it may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices

Further, if the oil is obtained by the method of solvent extraction and the oil imported into India whether
obtained by solvent extraction or otherwise, it shall be supplied for human consumption only after refining and shall
conform to the standards laid down under regulation 2.2.1 (16). The oil so refined shall not contain Hexane more than
5.00 ppm.


320

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

6. Rape-seed oil (toria oil) mustard oil (sarson ka tel) means the oil expressed from clean and sound mustard
seeds, belonging to the compestris, juncea or napus varieties of Brassica. It shall be clear free from rancidity,
suspended or foreign matter, separated water, added colouring or flavouring substances or mineral oil. It shall
conform to the following standards:—

Butyro-refractometer reading at 40°C 58.0 to 60.5

OR
Refractive index at 40°C 1.4646 to 1.4662
Saponification value 168 to 177
Iodine value 96-112:

Polybromide test shall be Negative

Unsaponifiable matter Not more than 1.2 per cent by weight
Acid value Not more than 6.0
Bellier test (Turbidity temperature -
Acetic acid Method) 23.0°C to 27.5°C
Test for Argemone oil Negative
Test for Hydrocyanic Acid Negative

Test for argemone oil shall be negative
However, it may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices

Further, if the oil is obtained by the method of solvent extraction and the oil imported into India whether
obtained by solvent extraction or otherwise, it shall be supplied for human consumption only after refining and shall
conform to the standards laid down under regulation 2.2.1 (16). The oil so refined shall not contain Hexane more than
5.00 ppm.

7, Rapeseed or mustard oil - low erucic acid means the oil obtained from clean and sound, low erucic acid oil
bearing seeds of rapeseed belonging to compestris, juncea, or napus varieties of Brassica by the method of
expression or solvent extraction and it shall be clear, free from rancidity, suspended or other foreign matter, separated
water, added colouring or flavouring substances or mineral oil and shall contain not more than 2 % erucic acid (as %
of total fatty acids) and shall conform to the following standards, namely:—

Butyro-refractometer reading at 40°C 58.6 to 61.7

OR
Refractive index at 40°C 1.465 to 1.467
Iodine value (Wij's method) 105 to 126
Saponification value 182-193
Unsaponifiable matter Not more than 20g/kg
Acid value Not more than 0.6
Bellier test (Turbidity temperature -
Acetic acid Method) Not more than 19.0°C
Test for Argemone oil Negative

Test for Hydrocyanic Acid (Ferric Chloride test) Passes the test

Further, Rapeseed oil obtained by solvent extraction shall be supplied for human consumption only if it is
refined and it shall conform to the standard laid down under regulation 2.2.1 (16)except acid value which shall be not
more than 0.6. Additionally, it shall have Flash Point (Pensky Marten Closed Method) not less than 250°C and the
oil so refined shall contain Hexane not more than 5.00 ppm:

Provided further that it may contain food additives permitted under these Regulations and Appendices".

8. Olive oil means the oil expressed from the fruit of the olive tree (Olea europaea sativa Hoffim. et Link). It shall
be of three types:—


[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 321

(i) Virgin olive oil means the oil obtained from the fruit of the olive tree by mechanical or other physical
means under conditions, particularly thermal, which do not lead to alteration of the oil. Virgin olive oil is oil
which is suitable for consumption in the natural state without refining. It shall be clear, yellow to green in
colour, with specific odour and taste, free from odours or tastes indicating alteration or pollution of oil. It shall
be free from rancidity, suspended or other foreign matter, separated water, added colouring or flavouring
substances or mineral oil.

(ii) Refined olive oil means the oil obtained from virgin olive, the acid content and or organoleptic
characteristics of which render it unsuitable for consumption in the natural state, by means of refining
methods which do not lead to alterations in the initial glyceridic structure. It shall be clear, limpid without
sediment, yellow in colour, without specific odour or taste and free from odours or taste indicating alteration
or pollution of oil. It shall be free from rancidity, suspended or other foreign matter, separated water, added
colouring or flavouring substances or mineral oil.

Further, if the oil is obtained by the method of solvent extraction and the oil imported into India whether
obtained by solvent extraction or otherwise, it shall be supplied for human consumption only after refining
and shall conform to the standards laid down under regulation 2.2.1 (16). The oil so refined shall not contain
Hexane more than 5.00 ppm.

(iii) Refined olive-pomace oil means the oil obtained from "olive pomace" by extraction by means of
solvents and made edible by means of refining methods which do not lead to alteration in the initial glyceridic
structure. It shall be clear, limpid, without sediment, yellow to yellow-brown in colour, without specific odour
or taste and free from odours or tastes indicating alteration or pollution of the oil. It shall be free from rancidity,
suspended or other foreign matter, separated water, added colouring or flavouring substances or mineral oil.

However, it may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices.

Further, if the oil is obtained by the method of solvent extraction and the oil imported into India whether
obtained by solvent extraction or otherwise, it shall be supplied for human consumption only after refining and shall
conform to the standards laid down under regulation 2.2.1 (16) . The oil so refined shall not contain Hexane more
than 5.00 ppm

It shall conform to the following standards:—

Parameters Virgin olive oil Refined olive oil Refined olive—
Pomace oil

B.R. Reading at 40°C 51.0-55.6 51.0-55.6 51.6-55.9

Or
Refractive Index at 40°C 1.4600-1.4630 1.4600-1.4630 1.4604-1.4632
Saponification value 184-196 184-196 182-193
(mg KOH/g oil)
Iodine value (wijs) 75-94 75-94 75-92
Unsaponifiable matter Not more than Not more than Not more than
(using light petroleum) 15g/kg 15g/kg 30g/kg
Acid Value Not more than 6.0 Not more than 0.5 Not more than 0.5
Bellier test Not more than 17°C Notmore than 17°C Not applicable
Semi-Siccative oil test Negative Negative Negative
Olive pomace oil test Negative Negative Negative
Cotton seed oil test Negative Negative Negative
Teaseed oil test Negative Negative Negative
Sesame seed oil test Negative Negative Negative
Test for Argemone oil Negative Negative Negative



THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

9. Poppy seed oil means the oil expressed from poppy seeds (papaver somniferum). It shall be clear, free from
rancidity, suspended or other foreign matter separated water, added colouring or flavouring substances or mineral
oil. It shall conform to the following standards:—

Butyro-refractometer

reading at 40°C 60.0 to 64.0

Or
Refractive Index at 40°C 1.4659 - 1.4685
Saponification value 186 to 194
Iodine value 133 to 143
Unsaponifiable matter Not more than 1.0 per cent
Acid value Not more than 6.0

Test for argemone oil shall be negative.
However, it may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices

Further, if the oil is obtained by the method of solvent extraction and the oil imported into India whether
obtained by solvent extraction or otherwise, it shall be supplied for human consumption only after refining and shall
conform to the standards laid down under regulation 2.2.1 (16). the oil so refined shall not contain hexane more than
5.00 ppm.

10. Safflower seed oil (berry ka tel) means the oil expressed from the seeds of Carthamus tinctorius. It shall be
clear, free from rancidity, suspended or other foreign matter, separated water, added colouring or flavouring
substances, or mineral oil. It shall conform to the following standards:—

Butyro-refractometer

reading at 40°C 62.4 to 64.7

Or
Refractive Index at 40°C 1.4674-1.4689
Saponification value 186-196
Iodine value 135-148
Unsaponifiable matter Not more than 1.0 per cent
Acid value Not more than 6.0

Bellier test Turbidity temperature
Acetic acid method Not more than 16°C

Test for argemone oil shall be negative.
However, it may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices

Further, if the oil is obtained by the method of solvent extraction and the oil imported into India whether
obtained by solvent extraction or otherwise, it shall be supplied for human consumption only after refining and shall
conform to the standards laid down under regulation 2.2.1 (16). The oil so refined shall not contain Hexane more than
5.00 ppm.

10.01 Safflowerseed oil and Safflowerseed oil (High Oleic Acid) means the oil expressed from the seeds of
Carthamus tinctorious L. It shall be clear, free from rancidity, suspended or foreign matter, separated water, added
colouring or flavouring substances, or mineral oil. Safflowerseed oil (High Oleic Acid) shall contain not less than
70% oleic acid as percent of total fatty acidshall conform to the following standards:—

Parameters High Oleic Acid Safflowerseed Oil
Safflowerseed Oil

B.R. Reading at 40°C 51.0-57.1 61.7-66.4

Or

Refractive Index at 40°C 1.460-1.464 1.467-1.470



[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 323

Iodine value (wijs method) 80-100 136-148

Saponification value 186-194 186-198

Unsaponifiable matter Not more than 10g/kg Not more than 15g/kg

Acid Value Not more than 4.0 mg/KOH/g oil Not more than 4.0 mg/KOH/g oil
Bellier test (Turbidity Not more than 16°C Not more than 16°C

temperature Acetic acid method)

Test for Argemone oil Negative Negative

Further, if the oil is obtained by the method of solvent extraction and the oil imported into India whether
obtained by solvent extraction or otherwise, it shall be supplied for human consumption only after refining and shall
conform to the standards laid down under regulation 2.2.1 (16). The oil so refined shall not contain Hexane more
than 5.00 ppm.

11. TARAMIRA OIL means the oil expressed from clean and sound seeds of Taramira (Eruca sativa). It shall
be clear, free from rancidity, suspended or other foreign matter, separated water, added colouring or flavouring
substances, or mineral oil. It shall conform to the following standards:—

Butyro-refractometer

reading at 40 °C 58.0 to 60.0

Or

Refractive Index at 40°C 1.4646-1.4659
Saponification value 174to177

Iodine value 99 to 105

Unsaponifiable matter Not more than 1.0 per cent
Acid value Not more than 6.0

Test for argemone oil shall be negative.

However, it may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices

Further, if the oil is obtained by the method of solvent extraction and the oil imported into India whether
obtained by solvent extraction or otherwise, it shall be supplied for human consumption only after refining and shall
conform to the standards laid down under regulation 2.2.1 (16). The oil so refined shall not contain Hexane more than
5.00 ppm.

12. TIL OIL (Gingelly or sesame oil) means the oil expressed from clean and sounds seeds of Til (Sesamum
indicum), black, brown, white, or mixed. It shall be clear, free from rancidity, suspended or other foreign matter,
separated water, added colouring or flavouring substances, or mineral oil. It shall conform to the following
standards:—

Butyro-refractometer

reading at 40 °C 58.0 to 61.0

Or
Refractive Index at 40°C 1.4646-1.4665
Saponification value 188-193
Iodine value 103-120
Unsaponifiable matter Not more than 1.5 per cent
Acid value Not more than 6.0
Bellier test (Turbidity temperature Not more than 22 °C
Acetic acid method)

Provided that the oil obtained from white sesame seeds grown in Tripura, Assam and West Bengal shall
conform to the following standards:—

Butyro-refractometer


324

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

reading at 40 °C 60.5 to 65.4

Or
Refractive Index at 40°C 1.4662-1.4694
Saponification value 185 to 190
Iodine value 115 to 120
Acid value Not more than 6.0
Unsaponifiable matter Not more than 2.5 per cent
Bellier test (Turbidity temperature Not more than 22°C
Acetic acid method)

Test for argemone oil shall be negative.

However, it may contain food additives permitted in these regulations and Appendix A

Further, if the oil is obtained by the method of solvent extraction and the oil imported into India whether
obtained by solvent extraction or otherwise, it shall be supplied for human consumption only after refining and shall
conform to the standards laid down under regulation 2.2.1 (16). The oil so refined shall not contain Hexane more than
5.00 ppm.

13. NIGER SEED OIL (Sargiya ka tel) means the edible oil obtained by process of expressing clean and sound

seeds of Guizotia abyssinica. It shall be clear and free from rancidity, suspended or other foreign matter, separated
water, added colouring or flavouring substances, mineral or other oil. It shall conform to the following standards:—

Butyro-refractometer

reading at 40 °C 61.0-65.0
Or
Refractive Index at 40°C 1.4665-1.4691
Saponification value 188-193
Iodine value 110 to 135
Unsaponifiable matter Not more than 1.0 per cent
Acid value Not more than 6.0
Bellier test (Turbidity temperature 25°C - 29°C
Acetic acid method)

Test for argemone oil shall be negative.

However, it may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices

Further, if the oil is obtained by the method of solvent extraction and the oil imported into India whether
obtained by solvent extraction or otherwise, it shall be supplied for human consumption only after refining and shall
conform to the standards laid down under regulation 2.2.1 (16). the oil so refined shall not contain hexane more than
5.00 ppm.

14. Soyabean oil means the oil expressed from clean and sound soyabeans (Soja max) from which the major
portion of the gums naturally present have been removed by hydration and mechanical or physical separation. It
shall be clear, free from rancidity, suspended or other foreign matter, separated water added colouring or flavouring
substances or mineral oil. It shall conform to the following standards:—

Butyro-refractometer

reading at 40 °C 58.5 to 68.0
Or

Refractive Index at 40°C 1.4649-1.4710
Saponification value 189 to 195
Iodine value 120 to 141

Unsaponifiable matter Not more than 1.5 per cent


[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 325

Acid value Not more than 2.50

Phosphorus Not more than 0.02

Test for argemone oil shall be negative.

However, it may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices

Further, if the oil is obtained by the method of solvent extraction and the oil imported into India whether
obtained by solvent extraction or otherwise, it shall be supplied for human consumption only after refining and shall
conform to the standards laid down under regulation 2.2.1 (16). the oil so refined shall not contain hexane more than
5.00 ppm.

15. Maize (corn) oil means the oil, extracted from the germ of clean and sound seeds of zea mays linn. fam.
graminiae, refined. it shall be free from rancidity, suspended or other foreign matter, separated water, added colouring
or flavouring substances or Mineral oil. It shall conform to the following standards:—

Butyro-refractometer

reading at 40°C 56.7 to 62.5

Or
Refractive Index at 40°C 1.4637-1.4675
Saponification value 187 to 195
Iodine value 103 to 128
Unsaponifiable matter Not more than 1.5 per cent
Acid value Not more than 0.50

Test for argemone oil shall be negative.

However, it may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices

Further, if the oil is obtained by the method of solvent extraction and the oil imported into India whether
obtained by solvent extraction or otherwise, it shall be supplied for human consumption only after refining and shall
conform to the standards laid down under regulation 2.2.1 (16). the oil so refined shall not contain hexane more than
5.00 ppm.

16. Refined vegetable oil means any vegetable oil which is obtained by expression or solvent extraction of
vegetable oil bearing materials, deacidified with alkali and/or physical refining and/or by miscella refining using
permitted foodgrade solvents followed by bleaching with absorbent earth and/or carbon and deodourised with
steam. No other chemical agent shall be used. The name of the vegetable oil from which the refined oil has been
manufactured shall be clearly specified on the label of the container. In addition to the under-mentioned standards
to which refined vegetable oils shall conform to the standards prescribed in these regulations for the specified
edible oils shall also apply except for acid value which shall be not more than 0.5. Moisture shall not exceed 0.10 per
cent by weight.

Test for argemone oil shall be negative.

1. The refined vegetable oil shall be obtained from the following vegetable oils:

(@) Coconut Oil

(i) Cottonseed Oil
(ai) Groundnut Oil
(iv) Nigerseed Oil
Safflower Oil

Sesame Oil

WH a

—

(v

a

(vi

a

(vii) Soyabean Oil
(viii) Sunflower Oil
Mustard/Rapeseed Oil

Linseed Oil

(ix

«

we oa


326

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY

[Part III—Sec. 4]

(xi)
(xii)
(xii)
(xtv)
(xv)
(xvi)
(xvii)
(xviii)

(xix)

wo

(xx
(xxl)

(xxl)

Mahua Oil

Olive Oil
Poppyseed Oil
Taramira Oil
Maize (Corn) oil
Watermelonseed Oil
Palm Oil
Palmolein

Palm Kernel Oil
Rice Bran Oil
Salseed fat
Mango Kernel fat

(xxiii) Kokum fat
(xxiv) Dhupa fat

(xxv) Phulwara fat

2. The refined vegetable oil shall comply with the following requirements:

The oils shall be clear and free from rancidity, adulterants, sediments, suspended and other foreign matter,
separated water, added colouring and flavouring substances and mineral oil

3. However, it may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices

17. Almond oil means the oil expressed from he seeds of prunus amygdalus Batach, var, dulcis koehne (sweet
almond) or of Prunus amygdalus Batach, var Amara Focke (bitter almond) without the application of heat. It shall be
clear from rancidity, suspended or other foreign matter, separated water, added colouring or flavouring substances
or mineral oil. It shall conform to the following standards:—

Butyro-refractometer
reading at 40 °C

Refractive Index at 40°C

54 to 57

1.4620-1.4639

Saponification value 186 to 195

Iodine value 90 to 109

Acid value Not more than 6.0
Bellier test Turbidity temperature Not more than 60°C

Acetic acid method

Test for argemone oil shall be negative.

However, it may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices

18. Water-melon seed oil means the oil extracted from the clean, sound seeds of the fruit of water-melon
(citrullus vulgaris schrad, family: cucurbitaceae). It shall be clear, free from rancidity, adulterants, sediments, suspended
and other foreign matter, separated water, added colouring and flavouring substances and mineral oil. It shall

conform to the following standards:—

Moisture and volatile matter

Butyro-refractometer
reading at 40 °C

Not more than 0.25 per cent

55.6-61.7


[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 327

Refractive Index at 40°C 1.4630-1.4670
Saponification value 190-198

Iodine value 115-125

Acid value Not more than 6.0
Unsaponifiable matter Not more than 1.5 %

Test for argemone oil shall be negative.

However, it may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices

Further, if the oil is obtained by the method of solvent extraction and the oil imported into India whether
obtained by solvent extraction or otherwise, it shall be supplied for human consumption only after refining and shall
conform to the standards laid down under regulation 2.2.1 (16). The oil so refined shall not contain Hexane more
than 5.00 ppm.

19, Palm oil means the oil obtained from fleshy mesocarp of fruits of the oil palm (Elaeis Guinensis) tree by the
method of expression or solvent extraction. It shall be clear, free from rancidity, suspended or other foreign matter,
separated water, added colouring and flavouring substances or mineral oil. It shall conform to the following standards,
namely:—

Butyro-refractometer

reading at 50 °C 35.5-44.0
Or
Refractive Index at 50 °C 1.4491-1.4552
Melting point (capillary slip method) Not more than 37 °C
Iodine value(Wij's method) 45-56
Saponification value 195-205
Unsaponifiable matter Not more than 1.2 per cent
Acid value Not more than 10.0

Indigenously produced raw Palm Oil obtained by method of expression may be supplied for human consumption
as such provided acid value is not more than 6.0 But palm oil imported into the country or produced by solvent
extraction shall be refined before it is supplied for human consumption and it shall conform to the standards laid
down under regulation 2.2.1 (16). Additionally, it shall have Flash Point (Pensky-Marten closed method) - Not less
than 250° C

Test for argemone oil shall be negative.
However, it may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices
The oil so refined shall not contain Hexane more than 5.00 ppm.

20. Palmolein means the liquid fraction obtained by fractionation of palm oil obtained from the fleshy mesocarp
of fruits of oil palm (Elaeis Guineensis) tree by the method of expression or solvent extraction. It shall be clear, free
from rancidity, suspended or other foreign matter separated water, added colouring and flavouring substances or
mineral oils. It shall conform to the following standards, namely:—

Butyro-refractometer

reading at 40 °C 43.7 -52.5
Or
Refractive Index at 40 °C 1.4550 - 1.4610
Iodine value (Wij's method) 54-62
Saponification value 195-205
Cloud Point Not more than 18°C
Unsaponifiable matter Not more than 1.2 per cent

Acid value Not more than 6.0


328

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

Further, if the palmolein is obtained from solvent extracted palm oil, it shall be refined before it is supplied for
human consumption and it shall conform to the standards laid down under regulation 2.2.1 (16). Additionally, it shall
have Flash Point (Pensky Marten closed method) - not less than 250°C.

Test for argemone oil shall be negative. However, it may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations
and Appendices

The oil so refined shall not contain Hexane more than 5.00 ppm.

21. Palm kernel oil means the oil obtained from sound kernel of the fruits of oil palm (Elaeis guinensis) tree by
the method of expression or solvent extraction. It shall be clear, free from rancidity suspended, or other foreign
matter, separated water, added colouring and flavouring substances or mineral oil. It shall conform to the following
standards, namely:—

Butyro-refractometer

reading at 40 °C 35,3 -39.5
Or
Refractive Index at 40 °C 1.4490 - 1.4520
Iodine value (Wij's method) 10-23
Saponification value 237-255
Unsaponifiable matter Not more than 1.2 per cent
Acid value Not more than 6.0

Further, if the oil is obtained by the method of solvent extraction, it shall be supplied for human consumption
only after refining and shall conform to the standards laid down under regulation 2.2.1 (16). additionally, it shall have
flash point (pensky marten closed method) - not less than 250°c.

test for argemone oil shall be negative.
however, it may contain food additives permitted in these regulations and appendices
the oil so refined shall not contain hexane more than 5.00 ppm.

22. Sun flower seed oil means the oil obtained from clean and sound sunflower seeds or cake from the plants
Helianthus annus linn (Family:compositae) by the method of expression or solvent extraction. It shall be clear, free
from rancidity, suspended or other foreign matter, separated water, added colouring or flavouring substances or
mineral oil. It shall conform to the following standards, namely:—

Butyro-refractometer

reading at 40°C 57.1 -65.0
Or
Refractive Index at 40°C 1.4640 - 1.4691
Iodine value (Wij's method) 100-145
Saponification value 188-194
Unsaponifiable matter Not more than 1.5 per cent
Acid value Not more than 6.0

Further, if the oil is obtained by the method of solvent extraction, it shall be supplied for human consumption
only after refining and shall conform to the standards laid down under regulation 2.2.1 (16). Additionally, it shall
have Flash Point (Pensky Marten closed method) - not less than 250°C.

Test for argemone oil shall be negative.
However, it may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices
The oil so refined shall not contain Hexane more than 5.00 ppm.

22.01 Sunflowerseed oil and Sunflowerseed oil (High Oleic Acid) means the oil obtained from clean and sound
Sunflowerseed or the High Oleic acid oil bearing Sunflowerseeds of Helianthus annuus L. by the method of
expression or solvent extraction. It shall be clear, free from rancidity, suspended foreign matter, separated water,
added colouring or flavouring substance or mineral oil. It shall contain not less than 75% oleic acid as percent of
total fatty acids. It shall conform to the following standards:—


[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 329

Parameters High Oleic Acid Sunflowerseed Oil Sunflowerseed Oil

B.R. Reading 61.7-68.0 at 25°C 52.5-63.2 at 40°C

Or

Refractive Index 1.467-1.471 at 25°C 1.461-1.468 at 40°C

Iodine value (Wijs method) 78-90 118-141

Saponification value 182-194 188-194

Unsaponifiable matter Not more than 15g/kg Not more than 15g/kg

Acid Value Not more than 4.0 mg/KOH/g oil Not more than 4.0 mg/KOH/g oil
Test for Argemone oil Negative Negative

Further, if the oil is obtained by the method of solvent extraction and the oil imported into India whether
obtained by solvent extraction or otherwise, it shall be supplied for human consumption only after refining and shall
conform to the standards laid down under regulation 2.2.1 (16). the oil so refined shall not contain hexane more than
5.00 ppm.

23 Rice bran oil means the oil obtained from the layer around the endosperm of rice obtained from paddy of
Oryza Sativa Linn. Fam Gramineae which is removed during the process of rice milling and is generally known as rice
bran.

Refined Rice Bran Oil shall be obtained from solvent extracted oil, neutralised with alkali, bleached with
bleaching earth or activated carbon or both and deodorised with steam. Alternatively deacidification' bleaching and
deodorisation may be done by physical means.

The oil shall be clear and free from rancidity, adulterants, sediments, suspended and other foreign matters,
separated water and added colouring and flavouring substances. The clarity of the oil shall be judged by the
absence of turbidity after keeping the filtered sample at 35°C for 24 hrs. Rice Bran Oil shall be sold for human
consumption only after refining. It shall conform to the following standards, namely:—

Moisture and Volatile Matter Not more than 0.1 percent by weight
Refractive Index
at 40°C 1.4600 - 1.4700
Or
Butyro-refractometer
reading at 40 °C 51.0-66.4
Saponification value 180-195
Iodine value (Wij's method 90-105
Acid value Not more than 0.5

Unsaponifiable matter, percent by weight

e@ for chemically refined Not more than 3.5 percent
e for physically refined Not more than 4.5 percent
@ Oryzanol Content Not less than 1.0 percent

Flash Point (Pensky Marten Closed method) Not less than 250 °C
Test for argemone oil shall be negative.
However, it may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices

Further, if the oil is obtained by the method of solvent extraction and the oil imported into India whether
obtained by solvent extraction or otherwise, it shall be supplied for human consumption only after refining and shall
conform to the standards laid down under regulation 2.2.1 (16). the oil so refined shall not contain hexane more than
5.00 ppm.


330

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

24. Blended edible vegetable oil means an admixture of any two edible vegetable oils where the proportion by
weight of any edible vegetable oil used in the admixture is not less than 20 per cent. The individual oils in the blend
shall conform to the respective standards prescribed by these regulations. The blend shall be clear, free from
rancidity, suspended or insoluble matter or any other foreign matter, separated water, added colouring matter,
flavouring substances, mineral oil, or any other animal and non-edible oils, or fats, argemone oils, hydrocyanic acid,
castor oil and tricresyl phosphate. It shall also conform to the following standards, namely:—

a) Moisture and volatile matter not more than 0.2 per cent by weight;
b) Acid value:—

Nature of oil Acid Value

(1) Both raw edible vegetable oils in the blend Not more than 6.0

(2) One raw edible vegetable oil (s) and one
refined vegetable oil (s) in the blend Not more than 5.0

(3) Both refined edible vegetable oils in the blend Not more than 0.5
(4) Unsaponifiable matter, percent by weight
(i) Blended with chemically refined rice bran oil Not more than 3.0 percent by weight
(ii) Blended with other edible vegetable oil Not more than 1.50 percent by weight
(5) Flash point (Pensky Martin closed method) Not less then 250°C

Test for Argemone oil shall be negative

However, it may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices

Further, if the oil is obtained by the method of solvent extraction and the oil imported into India whether
obtained by solvent extraction or otherwise, it shall be supplied for human consumption only after refining and shall
conform to the standards laid down under regulation 2.2.1 (16).

the oil so refined shall not contain hexane more than 5.00 ppm.

2.2.2 Interesterified vegetable fat: means an edible fatty material that has been so treated as to bring about a
rearrangement of fatty acid positions within the glyceride entities and hence a change in the physical properties like
melting point, viscosity, specific gravity and the like with very little change in the constitution of the fatty acids
themselves by a process of interesterification of the essentially neutral edible oil or fat, singly or in mixtures
generally through the use of alkaline catalysts exemplified by sodium or potassium metals, or their ethoxides or
hydroxides in the form either of anhydrous powders or in anhydrous glycerol medium followed by such post-
process steps as washing, bleaching and deodourisation, the last of which can be omitted if the interesterified fat is
to be incorporated as part of the raw material for further processing in edible fat products.

The interesterified fat shall be clear, free from soap, flavouring substances, rancidity, suspended or other
foreign matter, separated water and mineral oil. It shall conform to the following standards, namely:—

Gi) It shall not contain any harmful colouring, flavouring or any other matter deleterious to health;

(ii) No colour shall be added to interesterified fat unless so authorised by Government, but in no event
any colour resembling the colour of ghee shall be added;

(iii) If any flavour is used, it shall be distinct from that of ghee in accordance with a list of permissible
flavours and in such quantities as may be prescribed by Government:

Provided that diacetyl to the extent of not more than 4.0 ppm may be added to interesterified fat
exclusively meant for consumption by the Armed Forces;

(iv) It shall not have moisture exceeding 0.25 per cent;
(v) The melting point as determined by capillary slip method shall be from 31°C to 41°C, both inclusive;

(vi) The Butyro-refractometer reading at 40°C, shall not be less than 48 or Refractive Index at 40°C shall
not be less than 1.4580;

(vii) It shall not have unsaponifiable matter exceeding 2.0 per cent;

(viii) It shall not have free fatty acids (calculated as Oleic acid) exceeding 0.25 per cent;


[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 331

(ix) The product on melting shall be clear in appearance and shall be free from staleness or rancidity, and
pleasant to taste and smell;

(x) It shall contain raw or refined sesame (til) oil not less than 5 per cent by weight, but sufficient so that
when it is mixed with refined groundnut oil in the proportion of 20:80, the colour produced by the Baudouin
Test shall not be lighter than 2.0 red units in a 1 cm. cell on a Lovibond scale;

(xi) It shall contain not less than 25 I.U. of synthetic Vitamin A per gram at the time of packing and shall
show a positive test for Vitamin A when tested by Antimony Trichloride (Carr-Price) reagent (As per IS: 5886-
1970);

(xii) No anti-oxidant, synergist, emulsifier or any other such substance shall be added to it except with
the prior sanction of the Authority.

Test for argemone oil shall be negative.
However, it may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices

Further, if the oil is obtained by the method of solvent extraction and the oil imported into India whether
obtained by solvent extraction or otherwise, it shall be supplied for human consumption only after refining and shall
conform to the standards laid down under regulation 2.2.1 (16). The oil so refined shall not contain Hexane more than
5.00 ppm.

2.2.3 PARTIALLY HYDROGENATED SOYABEAN OIL

1. Partially hydrogenated and winterised soyabean oil means deodourised product obtained by light (mild or
"Brush") hydrogenation of degummed, deacidified, decolourised and winterised soyabean oil. The oil shall be
degummed by water with or without a food grade additive, deacidified by either neutralisation with alkali or steam
distillation (physical refining) or miscella refining using permitted food grade solvent, decolourised with bleaching
earth and/or carbon, partially hydrogenerated using nickel catalyst, winterised with or without the use of a food
grade solvent, filtered in a suitable filter press and deodourised with steam.

The product shall be clear, free from rancidity, suspended or other foreign matter, separated water, added
colouring or flavouring substances, castor oil, mineral oil, and other vegetable and animal fats.

It may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices.

It shall conform to the following standards:

Moisture Not more than 0.1 percent by weight
Refractive Index
at 40°C 1.4630 - 1.4690
Or
Butyro-refractometer
reading at 40°C 55.6 - 64.8
Saponification value 189-195
Iodine value (Wij's method 107-120
Acid value Not more than 0.50
Unsaponifiable Matter Not more than 1.5 percent by weight
Linolenic Acid (c18: 3) Not more than 3 percent by weight
Cloud Point (°C) Not more than 10°C

Flash Point (Pensky Marten Closed method) Not less than 250 °C
Test for argemone oil shall be negative

Further, if the oil is obtained by the method of solvent extraction and the oil imported into India whether
obtained by solvent extraction or otherwise, it shall be supplied for human consumption only after refining and shall
conform to the standards laid down under regulation 2.2.1 (16). The oil so refined shall not contain Hexane more than
5.00 ppm.


332

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

2. Partially hydrogenated soyabean oil means deodourised product obtained by light (mild or "brush")
hydrogenation of degummed, deacidified, decolorised soyabean oil. The oil shall be degummed by water with or
without a food grade additive, deacidified by either neutralisation with alkali or steam distillation (physical refining)
or miscella refining using permitted food grade solvent, decolourised with bleaching earth and/or carbon and
partially hydrogenated using nickel catalyst. The product shall again be deacidified, bleached and deodourised with
steam.

The product shall be clear liquid at 35 degree C. It shall be clear on melting, free from rancidity, suspended or
other foreign matter, separated water, added colouring or flavouring substances, castor oil, mineral oil or other
vegetable and animal Oils & fats.

It may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices

It shall conform to the following standards:

Moisture Not more than 0.1 percent by weight
Refractive Index
at 40°C 1.4630 - 1.4670
Or
Butyro-refractometer
reading at 40 °C 55.6-61.7
Saponification value 189-195
Iodine value (Wij's method 95-110
Acid value Not more than 0.50
Unsaponifiable Matter Not more than 1.5 percent by weight
Linolenic Acid (c18: 3) Not more than 3 percent by weight
Cloud Point (°C) Not more than 25°C

Flash Point (Penske Marten Closed method) Not less than 250 °C
Test for argemone oil shall be negative
Note : The edible oils prescribed under regulation 2.2.1 shall be free from Castor oil.

Further, if the oil is obtained by the method of solvent extraction and the oil imported into India whether
obtained by solvent extraction or otherwise, it shall be supplied for human consumption only after refining and shall
conform to the standards laid down under regulation 2.2.1 (16).The oil so refined shall not contain Hexane more than
5.00 ppm.

2.2.4 EDIBLE FATS:

1. Beef fat or suet means fat obtained from a beef carcass. it shall have a saponification value varying from 193
to 200 and an iodine value from 35 to 46.

it may contain food additives permitted in these regulations and appendices

2. Mutton fat means fat obtained from the carcass of sheep. it shall have a saponification value varying from
192 to 195 and an iodine value from 35 to 46.

it may contain food additives permitted in these regulations and appendices

3. Goat fat means the rendered fat from goat. it shall have a saponification value varying from 193 to 196 and
iodine value from 36 to 45.

It may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices

4, Lard means the rendered fat from hogs and shall not contain more than one per cent of substances other
than fatty acids and fat. it shall have a saponification value varying from 192 to 198 and iodine value from 52 to 65.

it may contain food additives permitted in these regulations and appendices

5. Cocoa butter means the fat obtained by expression from the nibs of the beans of Theobroma cocoa L. It shall
be free from other oils and fats, mineral oil and added colours. It shall conform to the following standards:


[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 333

Percentage of free fatty acids
(calculated as oleic acid)

Not more than 1.5

Iodine value 32 to 42
Melting point 29°C to 34°C,
Butyro refractometer
reading at 40°C

OR
Refractive Index at 40°C 40.9 to 48.0
1.4530-1.4580;
Saponification value 188 to 200

6. Refined salseed fat means the fat obtained from seed kernels of sal trees, shorea robusta Gaertn,
F.(N..diperrocaspaceae which has been neutralized with alkali, bleached with bleaching earth or activated carbon or
both, and deodorized with steam, no other chemical agents being used. Alternatively, deacidification, bleaching and
deodorisation may be done by physical means. The material shall be clear on melting and free from adulterants,
sediment, suspended or other foreign matter, separated water or added colouring substance. However, it may
contain food additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices. There shall be no turbidity after keeping the
filtered sample at 40°C for 24 hours. It shall conform to the following standards:—

(i) Moisture Not more than 0.1 percent
(ii) Butyro refractometer reading at 40°C 36.7-51.0
OR
Refractive Index at 40°C 1.4500 - 1.4600
(ii) Iodine Value (Wijs' Method) 31-45
(iv) Saponification value 180-195
(v) Unsaponifiable matter Not more than 2.5 percent by weight
(vi) Free fatty acids (expressed as Oleic acid) Not more than 0.25 percent by weight
QO
Acid value Not more than 0.5
(vii) 9:10 epoxy and 9:10 Dihydroxy stearic acid Not more than 3.0 percent by weight
(viii) Flash point (Pensky Marten closed method) Not less than 250°C

Test for argemone oil shall be negative

7. Kokum Fat means the fat obtained from clean and sound kernels of Kokum (Garcinia indica choisy) "also
known as kokum, by process of expression or by a process of solvent extraction from cake or kernel. It shall be
refined. The fat shall be clear on melting and free from rancidity, adulterants, sediments, suspended or other foreign
matter, separated water, added colouring and flavouring matters and mineral oil." However, it may contain food
additives permitted in these regulations and Appendix A.

It shall also conform to the following standards, namely:—

(a) Butyro-refractometer reading at 40°C, or 45 9-473
Refractive Index at 40°C 1.4565 to 1.4575
(b) Saponification value 187-191.7
(c) Unsaponifiable matters Not more than 1.5 per cent by weight
(d) Iodine value (wijs) 32-40
(e) Acid value Not more than 0.5
(f) Flash Point Not less than 250°C

Pensky-Martens (closed) method

Test for argemone oil shall be negative.


334

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

8. Mango Kernel Fat means the fat obtained from clean and sound kernels of Mango (Magifera Indica Linn)
by process of expression or by a process of solvent extraction from cake or kernel. It shall be refined. The fat shall
be clear on melting and free from rancidity, adulterants, sediment suspended or other foreign matter, separated
water, added colouring and flavouring matters and mineral oil. However, it may contain food additives permitted in
these Regulations and Appendices.

It shall also conform to the following standards, namely :—

(a) Butyro-refractometer reading at 40°C, 43.7-51.6
or Refractive Index at 40°C 1.4550 to 1.4604
(b) Saponification value 185-198
(c) Unsaponifiable matters Not more than 1.5 per cent by weight
(d) Iodine value (wijs) 32-57
(e) Acid value Not more than 0.5
(f) Flash Point
Pensky-Martens (closed) method Not more than 250°C

Test for argemone oil shall be negative.

9. Dhupa Fat means the fat obtained from clean and sound seed kernels of Dhupa, also known as Indian
Copal (Vateria Indica Linn) tree by process of expression or by a process of solvent extraction from cake or kernel.
It shall be refined. The fat shall be clear on melting and free from rancidity, adulterants, sediment, suspended or other
foreign matter, separated water, added colouring and flavouring matter and mineral oil. However, it may contain food
additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices

It shall also conform to the following standards, namely :—

(a) Butyro-refractometer reading at 40°C, 47, 5-49.5
or Refractive Index at 40°C 1.4576 to 1.4590
(b) Saponification value 187-192
(c) Unsaponifiable matters Not more than 1.5 per cent by weight.
(d) Iodine value (wijs) 36-43
(e) Acid value Not more than 0.5
(f) Flash Point Not less than 250°C

Penske-Martens (closed) method
Test for argemone oil shall be negative.

10. Phulwara Fat means the fat obtained from clean and sound seed kernels of Phulwara [variously named
Aisandra Butyrace (Roxb) Baelni, Madhuca Butyracea or Bassia Butyracea] by a process of expression or by a
process of solvent extraction from cake or Kernel. It shall be refined. The fat shall be clear on melting and shall be
free from rancidity, adulterants sediments, suspended on other foreign matters, separated water, added colouring
and flavouring substances and mineral oil. However, it may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations
and Appendices.

It shall also conform to the following Standards, namely :—

(a) Butyro-refractometer reading at 40°C, 48.6-51.0
or Refractive Index at 40°C 1.4584 to 1.4600
(b) Saponification value 192.5-199.4
(c) Unsaponifiable matters Not more than 1.5 per cent by weight.
(d) Iodine value (wijs) 43.8-47.4
(e) Acid value Not more than 0.5
(f) Flash Point
Penske-Martens (closed) method Not less than 250°C

Test for argemone oil shall be negative.


[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 335

2.2.5 MARGARINEAND FAT SPREADS:

1. Table margarine means an emulsion of edible oils and fats with water. It shall be free from rancidity, mineral
oil and animal body fats. It may contain common salt not exceeding 2.5 per cent, skimmed milk powder not exceeding
2 per cent; it may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices. It shall conform to the
following specifications, namely:—

Fat Not less than 80 per cent mass/mass

Moisture Not less than 12 per cent and not more than 16 per cent
mass/ mass.

Vitamin A Not less than 30 I.U. per gram of the product at the time of
sale.

Melting point of extracted fat 31°C to 37°C

(Capillary Slip Method)

Unsaponifiable matter of extracted fat Not more than 1.5 per cent by weight extracted fat.

Free fatty acids (as oleic acid) of extracted fat Not more than 0.25 per cent by weight

OR

Acid Value Not more than 0.5

It shall contain not less than 5.0 percent of its weight of Til oil but sufficient to ensure that when separated fat
is mixed with refined groundnut oil in the proportion of 20:80 the red colour produced by the Baudouin test shall not
be lighter than 2.5 red units in 1 cm cell on a lovibond scale.

Provided that such coloured and flavoured margarine shall also contain starch not less than 100 ppm and not
more than 150 ppm.

Provided further that such coloured and flavoured margarine shall only be sold in sealed packages weighing
not more than 500gms.

Test for Argemone oil shall be negative

2. Bakery and Industrial Margarine- means an emulsion of vegetable oil product with water. It shall be free from
added colour and flavour, rancidity, mineral oil and animal body fats. It may contain common salt not exceeding 2.5
percent. However, it may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices. It shall conform to
the following standards, namely:—

Fat Not less than 80 per cent m/m.
Moisture Not less than 12 per cent and Not more than 16 per cent m/m.
The separated fat of the products shall conform to the following :—

(@) =©VitaminA Not less than 30 IU per gram at the time of packaging and shall show a
positive test for Vitamin 'A' when tested by Antimony trichloride (carrprice)
reagents (as per IS 5886-1970).

(ii) Melting point by 31°C -41°C
Capillary slip method

(ii) Unsaponifiable matter Not exceeding 2.0 per cent but in case of the products where proportion of
Rice bran oil is more than 30 per cent by wt. the unsaponifiable matter shall
be not more than 2.5 per cent by wt. provided quantity of Rice bran oil is
declared on the label of such product as laid down in Regulation 2.4.5 (34) of
Food Safety and Standards (Food Products Standards and Food Additive)

Regulations, 2011.
(iv) Free Fatty Acid Not more than 0.25 per cent.
calculated as Oleic Not more than 0.5.

acid or
Acid value


336

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

It shall contain raw or refined sesame oil (Til oil) in sufficient quantity so that when the product is mixed with
refined groundnut oil in the proportion of 20 : 80, the colour produced by the Boudouin test shall not be lighter than
2.0 red unit ina 1 cm. cell on a Lovibond scale.

Test for argemone oil shall be negative.

3, Fat spread means a product in the form of water in oil emulsion, of an aquous phase and a fat phase of edible
oils and fats excluding animal body fats. The individual oil and fat used in the spread shall conform to the respective
standards prescribed by these regulations.

Fat spread shall be classified into the following three groups:—

S.No Types Characteristics
(a) Milk fat spread Fat content will be exclusively milk fat.
(b) Mixed fat spread Fat content will be a mixture of milk fat with any one or more of hydrogenated,

unhydrogenated refined edible vegetable Oils or interesterified fat.

(c) Vegetable fat spread Fat content will be a mixture of any two or more of hydrogenated,
unhydrogenated refined vegetable oils or interesterfied fat.

The fat content shall be declared on the label. In mixed fat spread, the milk fat content shall also be declared
on the label alongwith the total fat content.

The word ‘butter' will not be associated while labelling the product.

It may ‘contain’ edible common salt not exceeding 2 per cent by weight in aqueous phase; milk solid not fat: It
may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices. It shall be free from animal body fat,
mineral oil and wax. Vegetable fat spread shall contain raw or refined Sesame oil (Til oil) in sufficient quantity so that
when separated fat is mixed with refined groundnut oil in the proportion of 20:80 the red colour produced by
Baudouin test shall not be lighter than 2.5 red units in 1 cm cell on a Lovibond scale.

It shall also conform to the following standards, namely:—

(i) ~—s Fat Not more than 80 per cent and not less than 40 per cent by
weight.

(i) Moisture Not more than 56 per cent and not less than 16 per cent by
weight.

(ii) Melting point of Extracted fat Not more than 37°C

(capillary slip method) in case
of vegetable fat spread

(iv) Unsaponifiable matter of extracted fat

(a) In case of milk fat and mixed fat spread Not more than 1 per cent by weight

(b) In case of vegetable fat spread Not more than 1.5 per cent
(c) Acid value of extracted fat Not more than 0.5
(v) The vegetable fat spread shall contain Not less than 25 TU synthetic vitamin 'A' per gram at the

time of packing and shall show a positive test for vitamin
'‘A' when tested by Antimony Trichloride (Carr-Price)
reagents (as per I.S. 5886 - 1970)".

(vi) It shall contain Starch Not less than 100 ppm and
Not more than 150 ppm

It shall be compulsorily sold in sealed packages weighing not more than 500g. under Agmark certificate mark.

2.2.6 HYDROGENATED VEGETABLE OILS

1, Vanaspati means any refined edible vegetable oil or oils, subjected to a process of hydrogenation in any
form. It shall be prepared by hydrogenation from groundnut oil, cottonseed oil and sesame oil or mixtures thereof or
any other harmless vegetable oils allowed by the government for the purpose. Refined sal seed fat, if used, shall not


[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 337

be more than 10 per cent of the total oil mix. Vanaspati shall be prepared from one or more of the following vegetable

oils:

a. Coconut oil

b. Cotton-seed oil

c. Dhupa fat

d. Groundnut oil

e. Kokum fat

f. Linseed oil

g. Mahua oil

h. Maize (Corn) oil

i. Mango kernel fat

j. Mustard/Rape-seed oil

k, Niger-seed oil

1. Palm oil

m. Phulwara fat

n. Rice bran oil

o. safflower (Kariseed) oil

p. Salseed oil (up to 10%)

q. Sesame oil

r. Soyabean oil

s. Sunflower oil

t. Watermelon seed oil

u. Vegetable oils imported for edible purposes:

It shall conform to the standards specified below:—
(i) It shall not contain any harmful colouring, flavouring or any other matter deleterious to health;

(ii) No colour shall be added to hydrogenated vegetable oil unless so authorised by Government,
but in no event any colour resembling the colour of ghee shall be added;

(iii) If any flavour is used, it shall be distinct from that of ghee in accordance with a list of
permissible flavours and in such quantities as may be prescribed by Government:

Provided that diacetyl to the extent of not more than 4.0 p.p.m. may be added to Vanaspati
exclusively meant for consumption by the Armed Forces;

(iv) The product on melting shall be clear in appearance and shall be free from staleness or
rancidity, and pleasant to taste and smell;

(v) It shall contain raw or refined sesame (til) oil in sufficient quantity so that when the vanaspati
is mixed with refined groundnut oil in the proportion of 20:80, the colour produced by the Baudouin test
shall not be lighter than 2.0 red units in a 1 cm. cell on a Lovibond scale;

(vi) No anti-oxidant, synergist, emulsifier or any other substance shall be added to it except with
the prior sanction of the Authority.

Provided that imported crude palm oil and fractions thereof shall not be used by the producers
other than those who are engaged in manufacture of vanaspati/any other hydrogenated oil produce and
are equipped in the same location with the facilities for generation of hydrogen gas and hydrogenation
of the said imported crude palm oil and fractions thereof with the gas so generated in the manufacture
of vanaspati/any other hydrogenated vegetable oil product for edible consumption.

(vii) The product shall conform to the following requirements:


338

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

a) Moisture, percent by mass: Not more than 0.25
b) Melting point as determined by capillary slip method shall be from 3 1- 410C both inclusive

c) it shall not have unsaponifiable matter exceeding 2.0 percent but in case of vanaspati
where proportion of rice bran oil is more than 30 peercent by weight, the unsaponifiable matter
shall not be more than 2.5 perent by weight provided quantity of rice bran is declared on the label
of such vanaspati as laid down in regulation 2.4.2(8) of packaging and labeling regulations

d) Free fatty acid (as oleic acid), percent by mass: Not more than 0.25

e) Synthetic Vitamin 'A": Not less than 25.0 International units (IU) per gram at the
time of packing and shall test positive when tested with Antimony Trichloride (carr-Price
Reagent) as per IS:5886-1970

f) Residual Nickel: Not more than 1.5 ppm
g) Test for argemone oil shall be negative.

2. Bakery shortening means vanaspati meant for use as a shortening or leavening agent in the manufacture
of bakery products, that is, for promoting the development of the desired cellular structure in the bakery
product with an accompanying increase in its tenderness and volume; this will also confirm to the standards
prescribed in regulation 2.2.6 (1) excepts that—

(a) the melting point as determined by the capillary slip method shall not exceed 41°C.

(b)if aerated, only nitrogen, air or any other inert gas shall be used for the purpose and the
quantity of such gas incorporated in the product shall not exceed 12 per cent by volume thereof.

(c) it may contain added mono-glycerides and diglycerides as emulsifying agents.

Test for argemone oil shall be negative.

2.3: FRUIT & VEGETABLE PRODUCTS

2.3.1: Thermally Processed Fruits
1. Thermally Processed Fruits

(Canned/Bottled/Flexible packaged/Aseptically packed) means the products obtained from sound, matured,
dehydrated, fresh or frozen, peeled or un-peeled, previously packed, whole, halves or cut pieces of fruits packed
with any suitable packing medium and processed by heat, in an appropriate manner, before or after being sealed in
a container, so as to prevent spoilage. It may contain water, fruit juice, dry or liquid nutritive sweeteners, spices and
condiments and any other ingredients suitable to the product. The packing medium alongwith its strength shall be
declared on the label.

2. The product may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices. The product shall
conform to the microbiological requirements given in Appendix B. Drained weight of fruits shall be not less than the
weight given below:-

() Liquid pack Not less than 50.0 percent of net weight of the contents
(i) Solid Pack Not less than 70.0 percent of net weight of the contents

3. The container shall be well filled with the product and shall occupy not less than 90.0 percent of the water
capacity of the container, when packed in the rigid containers. The water capacity of the container is the volume of
distilled water at 20°C which the sealed container is capable of holding when completely filled.

2.3.2: Thermally Processed Fruit Cocktail / Tropical Fruit Cocktail

1. Thermally Processed Fruit Cocktail / Tropical Fruit Cocktail (Canned, Bottled, Flexible Pack And / Or
Aseptically Packed) means the product prepared from a mixture of fruits which shall be declared on the label. Such
fruits may be fresh, frozen, dehydrated or previously processed. The fruit mixture may be packed with any suitable
packing medium and processed by heat in an appropriate manner before or after being sealed in a container so as to
prevent spoilage. The packing medium alongwith its strength when packed shall be declared on the label.

2. The name of the fruits used in the product and prepared in any style shall be declared on the label alongwith
the range of percentage of each fruit used in the product. The drained weight of fruits shall be not less than the
weight given below:—


[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 339

(a) Liquid pack 50.0 percent of net weight of contents
(b) Solid Pack 70.0 percent of net weight of contents

3. The product may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices. The product shall
conform to the microbiological requirements given in Appendix B. The container shall be well filled with the product
and shall occupy not less than 90.0 percent of the water capacity of the container, when packed in the rigid
containers. The water capacity of the container is the volume of distilled water at 20°C which the sealed container is
capable of holding when completely filled.

2.3.3: Thermally Processed Vegetables

1. Thermally Processed Vegetables (Canned, Bottled/Flexible pack / Aseptically Packed) means the product
obtained from fresh, dehydrated or frozen vegetables either singly or in combination with other vegetables, peeled
or un-peeled, with or without the addition of water, common salt and nutritive sweeteners, spices and condiments or
any other ingredients suitable to the product, packed with any suitable packing medium appropriate to the product
processed by heat, in an appropriate manner, before or after being sealed in a container so as to prevent spoilage.
The packing medium alongwith its strength shall be declared on the label. The product may be prepared in any
suitable style appropriate to the product. The product may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations
and Appendices. The product shall conform to the microbiological requirements given in Appendix B. The name of
the vegetables used in the product and prepared in any style shall be declared on the label alongwith the range of
percentage of each vegetable used in the product. Drained weight of vegetables shall be not less than the weight

given below:—
(i) Liquid Pack
(a) Mushroom 50.0 percent of net weight of contents
(b) Green beans, carrots, peas, sweet corn/ baby corn 50.0 percent of net weight of contents
(c) Mushroon Packed in sauce 25.0 percent of net weight of contents
(d) Other Vegetables 50.0 percent of net weight of contents

(ii) Solid Pack 70.0 percent of net weight of contents

2. The container shall be well filled with the product and shall occupy not less than 90.0 percent of the water
capacity of the container, when packed in the rigid containers. The water capacity of the container is the volume of
distilled water at 20°C which the sealed container is capable of holding when completely filled.

2.3.4: Thermally Processed Curried Vegetables / Ready to Eat Vegetables

1. Thermally Processed Curried Vegetables / Ready to Eat Vegetables means the product prepared from fresh,
dehydrated or frozen or previously processed vegetables, legumes, cereals or pulses, whether whole or cut into
pieces. The vegetable(s), either singly or in combination, may be prepared in any suitable style applicable for the
respective vegetable in normal culinary preparation. It may contain salt, nutritive sweeteners, spices and condiments,
edible vegetable oils and fats, milk fat and any other ingredients suitable to the product and processed by heat, in
an appropriate manner, before or after being- in a container, so as to prevent spoilage.

2. The product may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices. The product shall
conform to the microbiological requirements given in Appendix B.

3. The container shall be well filled with the product and shall occupy not less than 90.0 percent of the water
capacity of the container, when packed in the rigid containers. The water capacity of the container is the volume of
distilled water at 20°C which the sealed container is capable of holding when completely filled.

2.3.5: Thermally Processed Vegetable soups

1. Thermally Processed Vegetable Soups (Canned, Bottled, flexible pack And/ Or Aseptically Packed) means
unfermented but fermentable product, intended for direct consumption, prepared from juice/ pulp/puree of sound,
mature vegetables, fresh, dehydrated, frozen or previously processed, singly or in combination, by blending with
salt, nutritive sweeteners, spices and condiments and any other ingredients suitable to the product, cooked to a
suitable consistency and processed by heat in an appropriate manner, before or after being sealed in a container, so
as to prevent spoilage. It may be clear, turbid or cloudy.


340

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

2. The product shall have total soluble solids (m/m) not less than 5.0 percent except for tomato soup where it
shall be not less than 7.0 percent (w/ w).

3. The product may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices. The product shall
conform to the microbiological requirements given in Appendix B.

4, The container shall be well filled with the product and shall occupy not less than 90.0 percent of the water
capacity of the container, when packed in the rigid containers. The water capacity of the container is the volume of
distilled water at 20°C which the sealed container is capable of holding when completely filled.

2.3.6: Thermally Processed Fruits Juices

1. Thermally Processed Fruits Juices (Canned, Bottled, Flexible And/Or Aseptically Packed) means unfermented
but fermentable product, pulpy, turbid or clear, intended for direct consumption obtained by a mechanical process
from sound, ripe fruit or the flesh thereof and processed by heat, in an appropriate manner, before or after being
sealed in a container, so as to prevent spoilage. The juice may have been concentrated and later reconstituted with
water suitable for the purpose of maintaining the essential composition and quality factors of the juice. It may
contain salt. One or more of the nutritive sweeteners may be added in amounts not exceeding 50 g/kg but not
exceeding 200g/kg in very acidic fruits except in case of Apple Juice, Orange Juice (reconstituted from concentrate),
Grape Juice, Pineapple Juice (reconstituted from concentrate). The product is not required to be called sweetened
juice till the added nutritive sweeteners are not in excess of I5g/kg.

2. The product may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices. The product shall
conform to the microbiological requirements given in Appendix B.

The product shall meet the following requirements:—

FRUIT JUICES
TSS Min( %) Acidity expressed as
Citric Acid Max.(%)
1 2 3
1. Apple Juice 10 3.5 (as malic acid)
2. Orange Juice
(a) Freshly expressed 10 3.5
(b) Reconstituted from concentrate 10 3.5
3. Grape Fruit Juice 9 -
4. Lemon juice 6 4.0(minimum)
5. Lime juice - 5.0(minimum)
6. Grape Juice
(a) Freshly expressed 15 3.5
(b) Reconstituted from concentrate 15 3.5
7. Pineapple Juice
(a) Freshly expressed 10 3.5
(b) Reconstituted from concentrate 10 3.5
8. Black Currant 11 3.5
9, Mango, Guava or any other pulp fruit 15 3.5P
10. Other fruit juices of single species- not
very acidic 10 3.5
11. Other fruit juices of single species-
very acidic 10 3.5
12. Other fruit juices of single species or
combination thereof - not very acidic 10 3.5
13. Other fruit juices of single species or

combination thereof - very acidic 10 3.5



[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 341

3. The container shall be well filled with the product and shall occupy not less than 90.0 percent of the water
capacity of the container, when packed in the rigid containers. The water capacity of the container is the volume of
distilled water at 20°C which the sealed container is capable of holding when completely filled.

2.3.7 Thermally Processed Vegetable Juices

1. Thermally Processed Vegetable Juices (Canned, Bottled, Flexible Pack And/Or Aseptically Packed) means
the unfermented but fermentable product or may be lactic acid fermented product intended for direct consumption
obtained from the edible part of one or more vegetables, including roots, and tubers (e.g. carrots, garlic) stems and
shoots (e.g. Asparagus), leaves and flowers (e.g. spinach and cauliflower) and legumes (e.g. peas) singly or in
combination, may be clear, turbid or pulpy, may have been concentrated & reconstituted with water suitable for the
purpose of maintaining the essential composition & quality factors of the juice and processed by heat, in an
appropriate manner, before or after being sealed in a container, so as to prevent spoilage. It may contain salt,
nutritive sweeteners, spices and condiments, vinegar, whey or lactoserum having undergone lactic acid fermentation
not more than 100 gm/kg and any other ingredients suitable to the product.

2. The product shall have total soluble solids free of added salts not less than 5.0 percent (w/w).

3. The product may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. The product
shall conform to the microbiological requirements given in Appendix B.

4, The container shall be well filled with the product and shall occupy not less than 90.0 percent of the water
capacity of the container, when packed in the rigid containers. The water capacity of the container is the volume of
distilled water at 20°C which the sealed container is capable of holding when completely filled.

2.3.8 Thermally Processed Tomato Juice:

1. Thermally Processed Tomato Juice means the unfermented juice obtained by mechanical process from
tomatoes (Lycopersicum esculentus L) of proper maturity and processed by heat, in an appropriate manner, before
or after being sealed in a container, so as to prevent spoilage. The juice may have been concentrated and reconstituted
with water for the purpose of maintaining the essential composition and quality factors of the juice. The product
may contain salt and other ingredients suitable to the product. The product shall be free from skin, seeds and other
coarse parts of tomatoes. The product shall have pleasant taste and flavour characteristic of tomatoes free from off
flavour and evidence of fermentation.

2. The product may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. The product
shall conform to the microbiological requirements given in Appendix B. The product shall conform to the requirements
of Total Soluble Solids m/m free of added salt to be not less than 5.0 percent.

3. The container shall be well filled with the product and shall occupy not less than 90.0 percent of water
capacity of the container, when packed in the rigid containers. The water capacity of the container is the volume of
distilled water at 20°C which the sealed container is capable of holding when completely filled.

2.3.9 Thermally Processed Fruit Nectars:

1. Thermally Processed Fruit Nectars (Canned, Bottled, Flexible Pack And / Or Aseptically Packed) means an
unfermented but fermentable pulpy or non-pulpy, turbid or clear product intended for direct consumption made from
fruit singly or in combination, obtained by blending the fruit juice / pulp/fruit juice concentrate and/ or edible part
of sound, ripe fruit(s), concentrated or unconcentrated with water, nutritive sweeteners and any other ingredient
appropriate to the product and processed by heat, in an appropriate manner, before or after being sealed in a
container, so as to prevent spoilage.

2. Lemon and Lime juice may be added as an acidifying agent in quantities which would not impair characteristic
fruit flavour of the fruit used. The product may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including
Appendix A. The product shall conform to the microbiological requirements given in Appendix B. It shall meet the
following requirements:—


342 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

TSS Min( %) Min. Fruit Juice Acidity Expressed
Content (%) as Citric Acid
Max (%)

NECTARS OF CITRUS JUICE

Orange Nectar 15 40 15

Grape Fruit Nectar 15 20 15

Pineapple Nectar 15 40 1.5

Mango Nectar 15 20 15

Guava Nectar 15 20 1.5

Peach Nectar 15 20 1.5

Pear Nectar 15 20 15

Apricot Nectar 15 20 1.5

Non-pulpy Black Currant Nectar 15 20 15

Other Fruit Nectar 15 20 1.5

Other Fruit Nectars of High Acidity/Pulpy /

Strong flavour 15 20 1.5

Mixed Fruit Nectar 15 20 1.5

3. The container shall be well filled with the product and shall occupy not less than 90.0 percent of the water
capacity of the container, when packed in the rigid containers. The water capacity of the container is the volume of
distilled water at 20°C which the sealed container is capable of holding when completely filled.

2.3.10: Thermally Processed Fruit Beverages / Fruit Drink/ Ready to Serve Fruit Beverages

1. Thermally Processed Fruit Beverages / Fruit Drink/ Ready to Serve Fruit Beverages (Canned, Bottled,
Flexible Pack And/ Or Aseptically Packed) means an unfermented but fermentable product which is prepared from
juice or Pulp/Puree or concentrated juice or pulp of sound mature fruit. The substances that may be added to fruit
juice or pulp are water, peel oil, fruit essences and flavours, salt, sugar, invert sugar, liquid glucose, milk and other
ingredients appropriate to the product and processed by heat, in an appropriate manner, before or after being sealed
in a container, so as to prevent spoilage.

2. The product may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. The product
shall conform to the microbiological requirements given in Appendix B. The product shall meet the following

requirements:—
(i) Total Soluble solid (m/m) Not less than 10.0 percent
(i) ‘Fruit juice content (m/m)
(a) Lime/Lemon ready to serve beverage Not less than 5.0 percent
(b) All other beverage/drink Not less than 10.0 percent

3. The container shall be well filled with the product and shall occupy not less than 90.0 percent of the water
capacity of the container, when packed in the rigid containers. The water capacity of the container is the volume of
distilled water at 20°C which the sealed container is capable of holding when completely filled.

2.3.11: Thermally Processed Mango Pulp / Puree and Sweetened Mango Pulp / Puree

1. Thermally Processed Mango Pulp / Puree and Sweetened Mango Pulp / Puree (Canned, Bottled, Flexible
Pack And/ Or Aseptically Packed) means unfermented but fermentable product intended for direct consumption
obtained from edible portion of sound, ripe mangoes (Mangifera indica.L.), by sieving the prepared fruits, where as,
the puree is obtained by finely dividing the pulp by a finisher or other mechanical means and processed by heat in
an appropriate manner, before or after being sealed in a container, so as to prevent spoilage.

2. It may contain one or more nutritive sweeteners in amounts not exceeding 50 gm/kg. However, the product
shall be described as sweetened Mango pulp/ puree if the amount of nutritive sweeteners is in excess of 15 gm/kg.


[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 343

3. The product may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. The product
shall conform to the microbiological requirements given in Appendix B. It shall meet the following requirements:-

(i) Total Soluble Solids (m/m)

(a) Sweetened Not less than 15.0 percent
(b) Unsweetened (Natural Mango Pulp) Not less than 12.0 percent
(i) Acidity as Citric Acid Not less than 0.3 percent

(For sweetened canned mango pulp)

4, The container shall be well filled with the product and shall occupy not less than 90.0 percent of the water
capacity of the container, when packed in the rigid containers. The water capacity of the container is the volume of
distilled water at 20°C which the sealed container is capable of holding when completely filled.

2.3.12 Thermally Processed Fruit Pulp / Puree And Sweetened Fruit Pulp / Puree other than Mango

1. Thermally Processed Fruit Pulp / Puree And Sweetened Fruit Pulp / Puree other than Mango (Canned,
Bottled, Flexible Pack And/Or Aseptically Packed) means unfermented but fermentable product intended for direct
consumption obtained from edible portion of sound, ripe fruit of any suitable kind & variety by sieving the prepared
fruits, where as, the puree is obtained by finely dividing the pulp by a finisher or other mechanical means and
processed by heat in an appropriate manner, before or after being sealed in a container, so as to prevent spoilage.

2. It may contain one or more nutritive sweeteners in amounts not exceeding 50 gm/Kg. However, the product
shall be described as sweetened pulp/puree if the amount of nutritive sweeteners is in excess of 15 gm. /kg.

3. The product may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. The product
shall conform to the microbiological requirements given in Appendix B. It shall meet the following requirements:-

(i) ‘Total Soluble Solids (m/m) exclusive of added sugar Not less than 6.0 percent
(i) Acidity as Citric Acid Not less than 0.3 percent

The container shall be filled with the product and shall occupy not less than 90.0 percent of the water capacity
of the container, when packed in the rigid containers. The water capacity of the container is the volume of distilled
water at 20°C which the sealed container is capable of holding when completely filled.

2.3.13 Thermally Processed Concentrated Fruit / Vegetable Juice Pulp/ Puree

1. Thermally Processed Concentrated Fruit / Vegetable Juice Pulp/ Puree (Canned, Bottled, Flexible Pack And/
Or Aseptically Packed) means the unfermented product which is capable of fermentation, obtained from the juice or
pulp or puree of sound, ripe fruit(s) / vegetable(s), from which water has been removed to the extent that the product
has a total soluble content of not less than double the content of the original juice/ pulp/ puree prescribed vide in
regulation 2.3.6 and 2.3.7. Natural volatile components may be restored to the concentrates where these have been
removed. It may be pulpy, turbid or clear and preserved by heat, in an appropriate manner, before or after being
sealed in a container, so as to prevent spoilage.

2. The container shall be well filled with the product and shall occupy not less than 90.0 percent of the water
capacity of the container, when packed in the rigid containers. The water capacity of the container is the volume of
distilled water at 20°C which the sealed container is capable of holding when completely filled.

2.3.14 Thermally Processed Tomato Puree And Paste

1. Thermally Processed Tomato Puree And Paste (Canned, Bottled, Flexible Pack And/ Or Aseptically Packed)
means unfermented product which is capable of fermentation, obtained by concentrating the juice of sound ripe
tomatoes to the desired concentration. It may contain salt and other ingredients suitable to the products.

2. The product may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. The product
shall conform to the microbiological requirements given in Appendix B. It shall meet the following requirements:—


344 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

S.No Product Total Soluble Solids (w/w)
1 Tomato puree Not less than 9.0 percent
2 Tomato Paste Not less than 25 percent

3. The container shall be well filled with the product and shall occupy not less than 90.0 percent of the water
capacity of the container, when packed in the rigid containers. The water capacity of the container is the volume of
distilled water at 20°C which the sealed container is capable of holding when completely filled.

2.3.15 Soup Powders:

1. Soup Powders means the products obtained by mechanical dehydration of fresh vegetables/ fruits
juice/ pulp/puree of sound, vegetables / fruits and or earlier concentrated, dehydrated, frozen or processed fruits &
vegetables, singly or in combination by blending with salt, nutritive sweeteners, spices and condiments and any
other ingredients suitable to the product, as appropriate to the product and packed suitably to prevent spoilage.

2. The product may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. The product
shall conform to the microbiological requirements given in Appendix B. The product shall comply with the following
requirements:—

(i) Moisture (m/m) Not more than 5.0 percent

(i) Total soluble solids (m/m) (on dilution on ready to serve basis) Not less than 5.0 percent

2.3.16 Fruit/Vegetable Juice / Pulp/ Puree With Preservatives For Industrial Use only:

1, Fruit/Vegetable Juice / Pulp/ Puree With Preservatives For Industrial Use only means an unfermented but
fermentable product, pulpy, turbid or clear, obtained by a mechanical process from sound ripe fruits/ vegetables.

2. The product may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. The product
shall conform to the microbiological requirements given in Appendix B.

3. The container shall be well filled with the product and shall occupy not less than 90.0 percent of the water
capacity of the container, when packed in the rigid containers. The water capacity of the container is the volume of
distilled water at 20°C which the sealed container is capable of holding when completely filled.

2.3.17 Concentrated Fruit Vegetable Juice /Pulp / Puree With Preservatives For Industrial Use Only:

1. Concentrated Fruit Vegetable Juice /Pulp / Puree With Preservatives For Industrial Use Only means an
unfermented product, which is capable of fermentation, obtained from the juice or pulp or puree of fruit(s) / vegetable
(s), from which the water has been removed to the extent that the product has a soluble solids content of not less
than double the content of the original juice, pulp, puree prescribed under Regulation 2.3.6 and Regulation 2.3.7. It
may be pulpy, turbid or clear.

2. The product may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. The product
shall conform to the microbiological requirements given in Appendix B.

3. The container shall be well filled with the product and shall occupy not less than 90.0 percent of the water
capacity of the container, when packed in the rigid containers. The water capacity of the container is the volume of
distilled water at 20°C which the sealed container is capable of holding when completely filled.

2.3.18 Tamarind Pulp/Puree and Concentrate:

1. Tamarind Pulp/Puree And Concentrate means the unfermented product which is capable of fermentation,
obtained from fresh or dried tamarind, by boiling with water and sieving it, and preserved either by thermal processing
or by using permitted preservatives.

2. The Tamarind Concentrate is the product obtained from tamarind pulp/ puree from which water has been
removed by evaporation to achieve appropriate concentration.

3. The product may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. The product
shall conform to the microbiological requirements given in Appendix B. It shall meet the following requirements:—


[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 345

Minimum TSS Minimum Acidity Ash Insoluble in dilute HCI
Percent Percent Percent (Maximum)
Tamarind Pulp/Puree 32 45 04
Tamarind Concentrate 65 9.0 0.8

4, The container shall be well filled with the product and shall occupy not less than 90.0 percent of the water
capacity of the container, when packed in the rigid containers. The water capacity of the container is the volume of
distilled water at 20°C which the sealed container is capable of holding when completely filled.

2.3.19 Fruit Bar/ Toffee:

1. Fruit Bar/ Toffee means the product prepared by blending Pulp/Puree from sound ripe fruit, fresh or
previously preserved, nutritive sweeteners, butter or other edible vegetable fat or milk solids and other ingredients
appropriate to the product & dehydrated to form sheet which can be cut to desired shape or size.

2. The product may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. The product
shall conform to the microbiological requirements given in Appendix B. The product shall comply with the following

requirements:—
(i) Moisture (m/m) Not more than 20.0 percent
(i) Total soluble solids (m/m) Not less than 75.0 percent
(iii) Fruit content (m/m) Not less than 25.0 percent

2.3.20 Fruit/Vegetable, Cereal Flakes:

1. Fruit/Vegetable, Cereal Flakes means the product prepared by blending fruit(s) Pulp/Puree of sound ripe
fruit(s) / vegetables of any suitable variety, fresh, frozen or previously preserved, starch, cereals & nutritive sweeteners,
other ingredients appropriate to the product with or without salt & dehydrated in the form of flakes.

2. The product may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. The product
shall conform to the microbiological requirements given in Appendix B. The product shall comply with the following

requirements:—
(i) Moisture (m/m) Not more than 6.0 percent
(i) Acid insoluble Ash (m/m) Not more than 0.5 percent
(iii) Starch (m/m) Not more than 25.0 percent

2.3.21 Squashes, Crushes, Fruit Syrups/Fruit Sharbats and Barley Water:

1. Squashes, Crushes, Fruit Syrups/Fruit Sharbats and Barley Water means the product prepared from
unfermented but fermentable fruit juice/puree or concentrate clear or cloudy, obtained from any suitable fruit or
several fruits by blending it with nutritive sweeteners, water and with or without salt, aromatic herbs, peel oil and
any other ingredients suitable to the products.

1.1 Cordial means a clear product free from any cellular matter, obtained by blending unfermented but
fermentable clarified fruit juice with nutritive sweeteners & water with or without salt and peel oil and any other
ingredients suitable to the products.

1.2 Barley water means the product prepared from unfermented but fermentable fruit juice by blending it with
nutritive sweeteners, water with or without salt and peel oil and barley starch not less than 0.25 percent and any
other ingredient suittable to the product.

1.3 The product may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. The product
shall conform to the microbiological requirements given in Appendix B. The product shall comply with the following
requirements:—


346 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]
Name of the products Min (%) of fruit juice/ Total Soluble Acidity expressed as
puree in the final product Solids Min (%) Citric Acid Max (%)

(1) Squash 25 40 3.5

(2) Crush 25 55 3.5

(3) ‘Fruit Syrup/Fruit Sharbats 25 65 3.5

(4) Cordial 25 30 3.5

(5) Barley Water 25 30 2.5

1.4 Any syrup/ sharbats containing a minimum of 10 percent of dry fruits shall also qualify to be called as
fruits syrups.

1.5 The container shall be well filled with the product and shall occupy not less than 90.0 percent of the water
capacity of the container, when packed in the rigid containers. The water capacity of the container is the volume of
distilled water at 20°C which the sealed container is capable of holding when completely filled.

2.3.22 Ginger Cocktail:

1. Ginger Cocktail (Ginger Beer Or Gingerale) means the product prepared by blending ginger juice or its
oleoresin or essence with water and nutritive sweeteners.

2. The product shall be free from extraneous matter. When suitably diluted shall have the colour and flavour
characteristic of the product.

3. The minimum total soluble solids shall not be less than 30.0 percent (m/m).

4, The product may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. The product
shall conform to the microbiological requirements given in Appendix B.

5. The container shall be well filled with the product and shall occupy not less than 90.0 percent of the water
capacity of the container, when packed in the rigid containers. The water capacity of the container is the volume of
distilled water at 20°C which the sealed container is capable of holding when completely filled.

2.3.23 Synthetic Syrup for use in Dispensers for carbonated water:

1. Synthetic Syrup for use in Dispensers for carbonated water means carbonated water obtained by blending
nutritive sweeteners with water and other ingredients appropriate to the product.

2. The total soluble solid content (m/m) of the product shall not be less than 30 percent. The product when
suitably reconstituted shall conform to the requirements of carbonated water and match in all respects, except
Carbon Dioxide contents, with similar product as bottled for direct consumption. It shall be free from extraneous
matter.

3. The product may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. The product
shall conform to the microbiological requirements given in Appendix B.

4, The container shall be well filled with the product and shall occupy not less than 90.0 percent of the water
capacity of the container, when packed in the rigid containers. The water capacity of the container is the volume of
distilled water at 20°C which the sealed container is capable of holding when completely filled.

2.3.24: SYNTHETIC SYRUP or SHARBAT

1. Synthetic syrup or sharbat means the syrup obtained by blending syrup made from sugar, dextrose or liquid
glucose.

It may also contain fruit juice and other ingredients appropriate to the product. It shall be free from burnt or
objectionable taints, flavours, artificial sweetening agents, extraneous matter and crystallization. It may contain
citric acid, permitted colours, permitted preservatives and permitted flavouring agents. It shall also conform to the
following standards namely:—

Total soluble solids Not less than 65 per cent by weight


[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 347

2.3.25 Murabba

1. Murabba means the product, prepared from suitable, sound whole or cut grated fruits, rhizome or vegetables,
appropriately prepared, suitable for the purpose, singly or in combination, by impregnating it, with nutritive
sweeteners to a concentration adequate to preserve it.

2. The product may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. The product
shall conform to the microbiological requirements given in Appendix B. The product shall conform to the following
composition:

(i) Total soluble solids (m/m) Not less than 65.0 percent
(ii) Fruit contents (m/m) Not less than 55.0 percent

3. The container shall be well filled with the product and shall occupy not less than 90.0 percent of the water
capacity of the container, when packed in the rigid containers. The water capacity of the container is the volume of
distilled water at 20°C which the sealed container is capable of holding when completely filled.

2.3.26 Candied, Crystallised And Glazed Fruit / Vegetable / Rhizome / Fruit Peel:

1.1 Candied Fruits / Vegetables/ Rhizome / Fruit Peel means the product prepared from sound and ripe fruits,
vegetables, rhizomes or fruit peel, of any suitable variety, appropriately prepared, by impregnating it with nutritive
sweeteners to a concentration adequate to preserve it.

1.2 Crystallised Fruit / Vegetable/ Rhizome / Fruit Peel means the product prepared from candied product by
coating with pure crystallised sugar or by drying the syrup on wet candied fruit.

1.3 Glazed Fruit/ Vegetable/Rhizome / Fruit Peel means the product prepared from candied product by coating
it with a thin transparent layer of heavy syrup with or without pectin which has dried to a more or less firm texture
on the product.

1.4 The product may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. The
product shall conform to the microbiological requirements given in Appendix B. It shall meet the following

requirements:—
(i) The percentage of total sugar (w/w) Not less than 70.0
(i) Percentage of reducing Sugar to total sugar Not less than 25.0

2.3.27 Tomato Ketchup and Tomato Sauce:

1. Tomato Ketchup and Tomato Sauce means the product prepared by blending tomato juice/Puree/Paste of
appropriate concentration with nutritive sweeteners, salt, vinegar, spices and condiments and any other ingredients
suitable to the product and heating to the required consistency. Tomato Paste may be used after dilution with water
suitable for the purpose of maintaining the essential composition of the product.

2. The product may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. The product
shall conform to the microbiological requirements given in Appendix B. It shall meet the following requirements:—

(i) Total Soluble solids (m/m) Not less than 25.0 percent
Salt free basis
(i) Acidity as acetic acid Not less than 1.0 percent

3. The container shall be well filled with the product and shall occupy not less than 90.0 percent of the water
capacity of the container, when packed in the rigid containers. The water capacity of the container is the volume of
distilled water at 20°C which the sealed container is capable of holding when completely filled.

2.3.28 Culinary Pastes / Fruits and Vegetable Sauces Other Than Tomato Sauce and Soya Sauce

1, Culinary Pastes / Fruits and Vegetable Sauces Other Than Tomato Sauce and Soya Sauce means a culinary
preparation used as an adjunct to food, prepared from edible portion of any suitable fruit/vegetable including, roots,
tubers & rhizomes, their pulps/purees, dried fruits, singly or in combination by blending with nutritive sweeteners,
salt, spices and condiments and other ingredient appropriate to the product.

2. The product may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. It may
contain caramel but shall not contain any other added colour whether natural or synthetic. The product shall
conform to the microbiological requirements given in Appendix B. It shall meet the following requirements:—


348 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]
Name of the Product Total Soluble Solids Acidity %
(Salt free basis) (m/m) (as acetic acid)
(1) Chilli Sauce Not less than 8.0 percent Not less than 1.0 percent
(2) Fruits / Vegetable Sauces Not less than 15.0 percent Not less than 1.2 percent
(3) Culinary Paste/ Sauce Not less than 8.0 percent Not less than 1.0 percent
(4) Ginger Paste Not less than 3.0 percent Not less than 1.0 percent

3. The container shall be well filled with the product and shall occupy not less than 90.0 percent of the water
capacity of the container, when packed in the rigid containers. The water capacity of the container is the volume of
distilled water at 20°C which the sealed container is capable of holding when completely filled.

2.3.29 Soyabean Sauce:

1. Soyabean Sauce means the product obtained from wholesome soyabeans, by fermenting the soyabean
paste in which trypsin inhibitors have been inactivated & blending with salt, nutritive sweeteners. It may contain
spices and condiments and other ingredients appropriate to the product preserved by using permitted preservative.

2. The product may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. The product
shall conform to the microbiological requirements given in Appendix B. It shall meet the following requirements:—

(i) Total Soluble solids (m/m) Not less than 25.0 percent
Salt free basis
(i) Acidity as acetic acid Not less than 0.6 percents

3. The container shall be well filled with the product and shall occupy not less than 90.0 percent of the water
capacity of the container, when packed in the rigid containers. The water capacity of the container is the volume of
distilled water at 20°C which the sealed container is capable of holding when completely filled.

2.3.30 Carbonated Fruit Beverages or Fruit Drinks:

1, Carbonated Fruit Beverages or Fruit Drink means any beverage or drink which is purported to be prepared
from fruit juice and water or carbonated water and containing sugar, dextrose, invert sugar or liquid glucose either
singly or in combination. It may contain peel oil and fruit essences. It may also contain any other ingredients
appropriate to the products.

2. The product may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. The product
shall conform to the microbiological requirements given in Appendix B. It shall meet the following requirements:—

(i) Total Soluble solids (m/m) Not less than 10.0 percent

(i) Fruit content (m/m)

(a) Lime or Lemon juice Not less than 5.0 percent

(b) Other fruits Not less than 10.0 percent

3. The product shall have the colour, taste & flavour characteristic of the product & shall be free from
extraneous matter.

4, The container shall be well filled with the product and shall occupy not less than 90.0 percent of the water
capacity of the container, when packed in the rigid containers. The water capacity of the container is the volume of
distilled water at 20°C which the sealed container is capable of holding when completely filled.

2.3.31: Jam

1. Jam means the product prepared from sound, ripe, fresh, dehydrated, frozen or previously packed fruits
including fruit juices, fruit pulp, fruit juice concentrate or dry fruit by boiling its pieces or pulp or puree with nutritive
sweeteners namely sugar, dextrose, invert sugar or liquid glucose to a suitable consistency. It may also contain fruit
pieces and any other ingredients suitable to the products. It may be prepared from any of the suitable fruits, singly
or in combination. It shall have the flavour of the original fruit(s) and shall be free from burnt or objectionable
flavours and crystallization.


[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 349

2. The product may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. The product
shall conform to the microbiological requirements given in Appendix B. It shall meet the following requirement:—

Total soluble solids (m/m) Not less than 65.0 percent

3. The product shall be manufactured from not less than 45 percent, by weight, of original prepared, fruit,
exclusive of any added sugar or optional ingredients of finished product except where fruit is strawberry or raspberry
where it shall contain not less than 25 percent fruit.

2.3.32 Fruit Jelly:

1, Fruit Jelly means the product prepared by boiling fruit juice or fruit (s) of sound quality, with or without
water, expressing and straining the juice, adding nutritive sweeteners, and concentrating to such a consistency that
gelatinisation takes place on cooling. The product shall not be syrupy, sticky or gummy and shall be clear, sparkling
and transparent.

2. The product may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. The product
shall conform to the microbiological requirements given in Appendix B. It shall meet the following requirements:—

Total soluble solids (m/m) Not less than 65.0 percent

3. The product shall be manufactured from not less than 45 percent, by weight, of original prepared fruit,
exclusive of any added sugar or optional ingredients of finished product.

2.3.33 Fruit Cheese:

1, Fruit Cheese means the product prepared from pulp/puree of sound, ripe fruit (s), whether fresh, frozen or
previously preserved or dry fruits, by cooking with salt, nutritive sweeteners to attain a thick consistency so that it
sets on cooling. Cheese shall be neither too soft nor too hard to chew. It may be prepared from any of the suitable
fruits, singly or in combination. It shall have the flavour of the original fruit(s) and shall be free from burnt of
objectionable flavours and crystallization.

2. The product may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. The product
shall conform to the microbiological requirements given in Appendix B. It shall meet the following requirement:—

Total soluble solids (m/m) Not less than 65.0 percent

3. The product shall be manufactured from not less than 45 percent by weight, of original prepared fruit,
exclusive of any added sugar or optional ingredients of finished product except where fruit is strawberry or raspberry
where it shall contain not less than 25 percent fruit.

2.3.34 Marmalades:

1. Marmalades means a product prepared by boiling sound fruits with peel, pulp and Juice, with or without
water, added nutritive sweeteners and concentrating to such a consistency that gelatinisation takes place on
cooling of the product. It shall not be syrupy, sticky or gummy and shall be clear and transparent.

2. The product may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. The product
shall conform to the microbiological requirements given in Appendix B. It shall meet the following requirements:—

(i) Total soluble solids (m/m) Not less than 65.0 percent
(i) Fruit content except peel (m/m) Not less than 45.0 percent
(iii) Peel in suspension Not less than 5.0 percent

3. The container shall be well filled with the product and shall occupy not less than 90.0 percent of the water
capacity of the container, when packed in the rigid containers. The water capacity of the container is the volume of
distilled water at 20 degree C which the sealed container is capable of holding when completely filled.

2.3.35 Dehydrated Fruits:

1, Dehydrated Fruits means the product, prepared from edible part of suitable variety of sound fruit, free from
blemishes, insect or fungal infection, of appropriate maturity, from which, moisture has been removed, under
controlled conditions of temperature, humidity and airflow, to the extent that the product is preserved.


350

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

2. It may be whole, sliced, quarters, pieces or powdered. The finished product shall have uniform colour and
shall be free from extraneous matter. The product shall have moisture content not more than 20 percent m/m. When
in powder form, it shall be free flowing and free from agglomerates.

3. The product may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. The product
shall conform to the microbiological requirements given in Appendix B.

2.3.36 Dehydrated Vegetables:

1. Dehydrated Vegetables means the product, prepared from edible portions of suitable variety of sound
vegetable, free from insect or fungal infection, free from blemishes, suitably prepared, from which moisture has been
removed under controlled conditions of temperature, humidity & airflow, to the extent that the product is preserved.

2. It may be whole, sliced, quarters, pieces, flakes, kibbled granules or powdered. The finished product shall
have uniform colour and shall be free from discolouration due to scorching or enzymatic reaction. It shall be free
from stalks, peels, stems and extraneous matter. When in powder form, it shall be free flowing and free from
agglomerates.

3. The product may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. The product
shall conform to the microbiological requirements given in Appendix B. It shall meet the requirements as given in the
Table below

SS. Name of Vegetables Moisture Sulphur Total Ash insoluble Peroxidase
No. not more than Dioxide ash not dilute HC] Test
(percent) not more more not more
than(PPM) than than
( percent ) (percent)
1. Green Leafy Vegetables 7 2000 ppm - - Negative
2. (a) Tubers like Arvi 7 2000 ppm - - Negative
(b) Lotus Root Tapioca
(c) Yam
(d) Carrot
(e) Potato
3. Karela 6 - - - Negative
4. Cabbage 6 2000 ppm - - Negative
5. Okra 8 2000 ppm - - Negative
6. Other Vegetables 8 2000 ppm 5 0.5 Negative
7. Powders of onion and Garlic 5 - 5 0.5 Negative
8. Powders of other vegetables 5 2000 ppm 5 0.5 Negative

including tomatoes

2.3.37 Frozen Fruits/Fruit Products:

1. Frozen Fruits/Fruit Products means the product frozen in blocks or individually quick frozen and offered for
direct consumption, if required. Frozen Fruits/Fruit products are prepared from fresh, clean, sound, whole, fruits of
suitable maturity, free from insect or fungal infection, which are washed, sufficiently blanched to inactivate enzymes,
if required, and are subjected to a freezing process in appropriate equipment. Freezing operation shall not be
regarded as complete unless and until the product temperature has reached (minus) - 18°C at the thermal center after
thermal stablization. It may be prepared in any style appropriate for the respective Fruits/Fruit product in normal
culinary preparation. It may contain salt, nutritive sweeteners, milk solids, spices and condiments and any other
ingredient suitable to the product.

2. The product may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. The product
shall conform to the microbiological requirements given in Appendix B.


[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 351

2.3.38 Frozen Vegetables:

1. Frozen Vegetables means the product frozen in blocks or individually quick frozen and offered for direct
consumption, if required. Frozen vegetables are prepared from sound, clean vegetables of suitable maturity, free
from insect or fungal infection, which are washed, sufficiently blanched to inactivate enzymes and are subjected to
a freezing process in appropriate equipment. Freezing operation shall not be regarded as complete unless and until
the product temperature has reached (minus) - 18°C at the thermal center after thermal stabilization. It may be
prepared in any style appropriate for the respective vegetable in normal culinary preparation. It may contain salt,
nutritive sweeteners, milk solids, spices and condiments and any other ingredient suitable to the product.

2. It shall have normal colour characteristic of the individual Vegetable. It shall have taste & flavour characteristic
of the kind & variety of the vegetable used & shall be free from sand, grit & other foreign matter.

3. The product shall test negative for peroxidase. The product shall conform to the microbiological requirements
given in Appendix B.

2.3.39 Frozen Curried Vegetables/Ready-to-Eat Vegetables:

1. Frozen Curried Vegetables/Ready-to-Eat Vegetables means the product prepared from Fresh, Dehydrated or
Frozen or previously processed vegetables, legumes, cereals or pulses, whether whole or cut into pieces. Vegetable(s)
either singly or in combination may be prepared in any suitable style applicable for the respective vegetables in
normal culinary preparation. It may contain salt, nutritive sweeteners, spices and condiments, edible vegetable oils
and fats and milk fat and any other ingredients suitable to the product and subjected to freezing process in
appropriate equipments. Freezing operation shall not be regarded as complete unless and until the product temperature
has reached (minus) - 18°C at the thermal center after thermal sterilization.

2. The product shall conform to the microbiological requirements given in Appendix B.

2.3.40 Fruit Based Beverage Mix/Powdered Fruit Based Beverage:

1. Fruit Based Beverage Mix/Powdered Fruit Based Beverage means a product, in powder form, intended for
use after dilution, obtained by blending fruit solids with nutritive sweeteners and other ingredients appropriate to
the product & packed in hermetically sealed containers to prevent spoilage. It shall have colour & flavour
characteristic of the named fruit. It may contain Vitamins and Minerals.

2. The product may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. The product
shall conform to the microbiological requirements given in Appendix B. It shall meet the following requirements:—

(i) Moisture (m/m) Not more than 5.0 percent

(i) Fruit juice content (m/m) when reconstituted by Not less than 5.0 percent
dilution according to direction for use

2.3.41 Fruits and Vegetable Chutney:

1. Fruits and Vegetable Chutney means the product prepared from washed, clean, sound raw fruit(s) and / or
vegetable(s) of any suitable variety, which have been peeled, sliced or chopped or shreded or comminuted and
cooked with nutritive sweetener. It may contain salt, spices and condiments and any other ingredients suitable to
the product and preserved by thermal processing or other means.

2. The product may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. The product
shall conform to the microbiological requirements given in Appendix B. It shall meet the following requirements:—

(i) Total soluble solids (m/m)

(a) Fruit Chutney Not less than 50.0 percent
(b) Vegetable Chutney Not less than 25.0 percent
(c) Hot and Sour (Spicy Chutney) Not less than 25.0 percent
(i) Fruits and Vegetable content (m/m) Not less than 40.0 percent
(ii) pH Not more than 4.6
(iv) Total ash (m/m) Not more than 5.0 percent
(v) Ash insoluble in hydrochloric acid (m/m) Not more than 0.5 percent


352

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

3. The container shall be well filled with the product and shall occupy not less than 90.0 percent of the water
capacity of the container, when packed in the rigid containers. The water capacity of the container is the volume of
distilled water at 20°C which the sealed container is capable of holding when completely filled. This requirement
shall not be applicable for bulk packs for industrial use.

2.3.42 Mango Chutney:

1. Mango Chutney means the product prepared from washed clean sound mango (Mangifera indica L.) of any
suitable variety, which have been peeled, sliced or chopped or shreded or comminuted and cooked with nutritive
sweeteners. It may contain Salt, Spices, Condiments and any other ingredient suitable to the product and preserved
by thermal processing/ or other means.

2. The product may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. The product
shall conform to the microbiological requirements given in Appendix B. It shall meet the following requirements:—

(i) Total Soluble solids (m/m) Not less than 50.0 percent
(i) Fruit content (m/m) Not less than 40.0 percent
(ii) pH Not more than 4.6

(iv) Total ash Not more than 5.0 percent
(v) Ash insoluble in hydrochloric acid Not more than 0.5 percent

3. The container shall be well filled with the product and shall occupy not less than 90.0 percent of the water
capacity of the container, when packed in the rigid containers. The water capacity of the container is the volume of
distilled water at 20°C which the sealed container is capable of holding when completely filled.

2.3.43 Pickles:

1. Pickles means the preparation made from fruits or vegetables or other edible plant material including
mushrooms free from insect damage or fungal infection, singly or in combination preserved in salt, acid, sugar or
any combination of the three. The pickle may contain onion, garlic, ginger, sugar jaggery, edible vegetable oil, green
or red chillies, spices, spice extracts/oil, limejuice, vinegar/ acetic acid, citric acid, dry fruits and nuts. It shall be free
from copper, mineral acid, alum, synthetic colours and shall show no sign of fermentation.

2. The product may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. The product
shall conform to the microbiological requirements given in Appendix B. Pickles may be of combinations as given
below:—

(i) Pickles in Citrus juice or Brine conforming to the following requirements:—

(a) Drained Weight Not less than 60.0 percent
(b) Sodium Chloride content when packed in Brine Not less than 12.0 percent
(c) Acidity as Citric Acid when packed In Citrus Juice Not less than 1.2 percent
(ii) Pickles in Oil
(a) Drained Weight Not less than 60.0 percent
(b) Fruit and Vegetable pieces shall be practically remaining submerged in oil
(iii) Pickles in Vinegar
(a) Drained Weight Not less than 60.0 percent
(b) Acidity of vinegar as acetic acid Not less than 2.0 percent

(iv) Pickle without medium means the pickles other than enumerated above. This may contain ingredients
given in Para | of this specification. Such pickles shall be labelled as "(give name of vegetable or fruits) Pickle".

2.3.44 Table Olives:

1. Table Olives means the product obtained from sound clean fruits of proper maturity from Olive tree (Olea
europaea sativa Hoff of link) and suitably processed and preserved by natural fermentation / thermal processing or
by addition of preservative. The product may be in the form of green olives, olives turning colour before complete
ripeness or black olives and may be whole, stoned (pitted) stuffed, halved, quartered, sliced, chopped, minced or in


[art II—ars 4]

FRA AT USTIA + STH 353

broken form. The product may contain water, common salt, vinegar, olive oil, nutritive sweeteners and stuffing
material pimiento, onion, almond, celery, anchovy, olive, orange or lemon peel, hazelnut capers etc singly or in
combination or in the form of a paste, spices, spice extracts and aromatic herbs. The product shall be of uniform
colour except seasoned olives and olives turning colour free from any foreign matter, off flavour and taste and
abnormal fermentation. The product may contain food additive permitted in these regulations including Appendix
A. The product shall conform to the microbiological requirements given in Appendix B. It shall conform to the

following requirements:—
Product in brine Sodium Chloride in brine | PH of brine Acidity of brine as
lactic acid
(A) Green olives treated /untreated - - —
(i) in hermetically sealed containers Not less than 5.0 percent Not more than4.0  —
(ii) in non hermetically sealed containers Not less than 6.0 percent Not more than 4.5 —
(iii) with natural lactic fermentation - - Not less than 0.4
Percent

(B) Seasoned green olives
(i) in hermetically sealed containers
(ii) in non hermetically sealed containers

(C) Olives turning colour - all
Treatments

(D) Black Olives
(i) In brine
(ii) in dry salt
(E) Damaged matter
(F) Insect damaged Units
(G) Foreign matter

Not less than 4.0 percent
Not less than 6.0 percent
Not less than 6.0 percent

Not less than 7.0 percent
Not less than 10.0 percent

Not more than 4.0 —
Not more than 4.5 —

Not more than 2.0 percent by count
Not more than 2.0 percent by count

Not more than 1 unit per kg

Explanations:- For the purpose of this paragraph,—

‘Damaged Units' mean units showing imperfection or damage to the mesocarp which may or may not be
associated with superficial marks;

‘Insect Damaged Units' means units showing insect holes or deformed fruits or those with abnormal stains or
whose mesocarp has an abnormal aspect;

‘Foreign matter’ means any vegetable matter not injurious to health such as leaves, stem etc.

2.3.45 Grated Desiccated Coconut:

1. Grated Desiccated Coconut means the product obtained by peeling, milling and drying the kernel of
coconut (cocos nucifera). The product may be in the form of thin flakes, chips or shreds. The product shall be white
in colour free from foreign matter, living insects, mould, dead insects, insect fragments and rodent contamination.
The product shall have pleasant taste and flavour, free from rancidity and evidence of fermentation. The product
may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. The products shall conform to the
microbiological requirements given in Appendix B. The product shall conform to the following requirements:—

(i) Extraneous Vegetable matter Not more than 15 units/100 gm
(i) Moisture (m/m)
(iii) Total Ash (m/m)
(iv) Oil Content (m/m)

(v) Acidity of extracted fat pressed as
Lauric Acid (m/m)

(vi) Sulphur Dioxide

Not more than 3.0 percent
Not more than 2.5 percent
Not less than 55.0 percent

Not more than 0.3 percent

Not more than 50.0 mg/kg


354

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

Explanation:— For the purpose of this paragraph Extraneous vegetable matter means fragments of shell, fibre,
peel and burnt particles.

2.3.46 VINEGAR:

1. Brewed Vinegar means a product obtained by alcoholic and acetic acid fermentation of any suitable medium
such as fruits, malt (brewed exclusively from malted barley or other cereals), molasses, Jaggary, Sugar Cane juice etc.
with or without addition of caramel and spices. It shall not be fortified with acetic acid.

a) The product may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. The
product shall conform to the microbiological requirements given in Appendix B. It shall meet the following

requirements:—
(i) Acidity (m/v) Not less than 3.75 percent calculated as acetic Acid
(i) Total Solids (m/v) Not less than 1.5 percent
(ii) Total ash content Not less than 0.18 percent

(iv) It shall not contain sulphuric acid or any other mineral acid. It shall be free from any foreign substances
or colouring matter except caramel.

b) The container shall be well filled with the product and shall occupy not less than 90.0 percent of the
water capacity of the container, when packed in the rigid containers. The water capacity of the container is the
volume of distilled water at 20°C which the sealed container is capable of holding when completely filled.

2. Synthetic Vinegar means the product prepared from acetic acid with or without caramel & spices and shall
confirm to the following requirements:

(i) Acidity of the product shall not be less than 3.75 percent m/v.

Gi) It shall not contain sulphuric acid or any other mineral acid. It shall be free from any foreign
substance or colouring matter except caramel.
2. Synthetic vinegar shall be distinctly labelled as
SYNTHETIC - PREPARED FROM ACETIC ACID.

3. The container shall be well filled with the product and shall occupy not less than 90.0 percent of the water
capacity of the container, when packed in the rigid containers. The water capacity of the container is the volume of
distilled water at 20°C which the sealed container is capable of holding when completely filled.

2.3.47 NUTS AND RAISINS:

1. Groundnut kernel (deshelled) for direct human consumption commonly known as moongphali are obtained
from the plant arachis hypogols. the kernels shall be free from non-edible seeds such as mahua, caster, neem or
argemone etc.

It shall be free from colouring matter and preservatives. It shall be practically free from extraneous matter, such
as stones, dirt, clay etc. The kernels shall conform to the following standards, namely:—

Moisture Not more than 7.0 per cent
Damaged kernel including slightly damaged kernel Not more than 5.0 per cent by weight.
Aflatoxin content Not more than 30 parts per billion.

2. Raisins means the product obtained by drying sound, clean grapes of proper maturity belonging to Vitis
vinifera L. The product may be washed, with or without seeds and stems and may be bleached with Sulphur Dioxide.
The product shall be free from foreign matter, living insects, mould, dead insects, insect fragments and rodent
contamination. The product shall have uniform colour, pleasant taste and flavour, free from odour and taste and
evidence of fermentation. The product shall be free from added colouring matter. The product may contain food
additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. The product shall conform to the microbiological
requirements given in Appendix B. The product shall conform to the following requirements:—

(i) Moisture (m/m) Not more than 15.0 percent
(i) Damaged Raisins (m/m) Not more than 2.0 percent

(iii) Sugared Raisins (m/m) Not more than 15.0 percent


[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 355

Explanation.- for the purpose of this paragraph,—

(i) ‘Damaged Raisins' means raisins affected by sunburn, scars, mechanical injury which seriously
affects the appearance, edibility and keeping quality;

(ii) ‘Sugared Raisins' means raisins with external or internal sugar crystals which are readily apparent
and seriously affect the appearance of the raisins.

3. Pistachio Nuts means the product obtained from mature seeds of Pistacia vera L which have been sun dried
and their shells opened naturally or mechanically. The product may be raw, roasted, salted and/or lime juice treated.
The product shall be free from foreign matter, living insects, mould, dead insects, insect fragments and rodent
contamination. The product shall have pleasant taste and flavour, free from odour and taste, mustiness and rancidity.
The product shall conform to the following requirements:—

(i) Moisture (m/m) Not more than 7.0 percent
(ii) Unopened Shells (m/m) Not more than 2.0 percent
(iii) Empty Shells (m/m) Not more than 1.0 percent

Explanation.-for the purpose of this paragraph,—
(i) Unopened Shells' means shells which are not split open but contain a fully developed kernel;
(ii) ‘Empty Shells' means shells in which kernel is not developed;
(iii) 'Mouldy Shells' means nuts affected by mould.

4, Dates means the product obtained by drying sound, clean fruits of proper maturity belonging to Phoenix
dactylifera. The product may be washed, pitted or unpitted, with or without cap, pressed or loose. The product may
be treated with sugar, glucose syrup, flour and vegetable oil. The product shall be free from foreign matter, living
insects, mould, dead insects, insect fragments and rodent contamination. The product shall have pleasant taste and
smell, free from odour and evidence of fermentation. The product shall be free from any added colouring matter. The
product may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. The product shall conform
to the microbiological requirements given in Appendix B. The product shall conform to the following requirements:—

(i) Moisture (m/m) Not more than 30.0 percent
(i) Ash insoluble in dil Hel Not more than 0.1 percent
(iii) Blemished / Damaged Units Not more than 5.0 percent
(i) (iv) Extraneous matter Not more than 1.0 percent

Explanation:—- For the purpose of this paragraph —
(i) ‘Blemished' means units showing scars, discoloration, sun burn, dark spots on the surface;

(ii) 'Damaged' means dates affected by mashing and/ or tearing of the flesh exposing the pit or significantly
changing the appearance.

(iii) 'Extraneous vegetable matter’ means stalks, pieces of shells, pits, fibre, peel, etc.

5. Dry Fruits and Nuts means the products obtained by drying sound, clean fruits and nuts of proper maturity.
The product may be with or without stalks, shelled or unshelled, pitted or unpitted or pressed into blocks. The
product shall be free from mould, living / dead insects, insect fragments and rodent contamination. The product
shall be uniform in colour with a pleasant taste and flavour characteristic of the fruit/ nut free from off flavour,
mustiness, rancidity and evidence of fermentation. The product shall be free from added colouring. The product
shall conform to the following requirements:—

(i) Extraneous Vegetable matter (m/m) Not more than 1.0 percent
(ii) Damaged/Discoloured units (m/m) Not more than 2.0 percent
(ii) Acidity of extracted fat expressed as oleic Acid Not more than 1.25 percent

Explanation — For the purpose of this paragraph —
(i) 'Extraneous vegetable matter’ means stalks, pieces of shells, pits, fibre, peel;

(ii) ‘Damaged or Discoloured' means units affected by sunburn, scars mechanical injury, discolouration
and insects.


356 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

2.3.48 BEAN: means dry kidney shaped or flattened seeds of the leguminous varieties used as food, either whole or
prepared as dal. It shall not contain hydrocyanic acid exceeding 20 parts per million as determined by Association
of Official Analytical Chemists Maceration method.

2.4 CEREALS AND CEREAL PRODUCTS

2.4.1 ATTA

1. Atta or resultant atta means the coarse product obtained by milling or grinding clean wheat free from rodent
hair and excreta It shall conform to the following standards:—

Moisture Not more than 14.0 per cent

(when determined by heating at 130-133°C for 2 hours).
Total ash Not more than 2.0 per cent

(on dry weight basis).
Ash insoluble in dilute HC] Not more than 0.15 percent (on dry weight basis).
Gluten (on dry weight basis). Not less than 6.0 per cent
Alcoholic acidity (with 90 per cent alcohol) Not more than 0.18 per cent

expressed as H2S04 (on dry weight basis)
It shall be free from rodent hair and excreta
2. Fortified atta means the product obtained by adding one or more of the following materials to atta, namely:—
(a) Calcium carbonate (prepared chalk, popularly known as Creta preparata).
(b) Iron
(c) Thiamine
(d) Riboflavin, and
(e) Niacin.

The calcium carbonate powder, if added for fortification shall be in such amount that 100 parts by weight of
fortified atta shall contain not less than 0.30 and not more than 0.35 parts by weight of calcium carbonate. It shall be
free from Rodent hair and excreta

3. Protein rich (paushtik) atta means the product obtained by mixing wheat atta with groundnut flour "or soya
flour", or a combination of both". flour up to an extent of 10.0 per cent. Soya flour which is a solvent extracted soya
flour used in such mix shall conform to the standards of Soya flour laid down under 2.4.13 (1). It shall be free from
insect or fungus infestation, odour and rancid taste. It shall not contain added flavouring and colouring agents or
any other extraneous matter. It shall conform to the following standards:—

Moisture Not more than 14.0 per cent

Total ash Not more than 2.75 per cent on dry basis.
Ash insoluble in dilute HCl Not more than 0.1 percent on dry basis.
Total Protein (N x 6.25) Not less than 12.5 percent on dry basis
Crude Fibre Not more than 2.5 per cent on dry basis
Alcoholic acidity (with 90 per cent alcohol) Not more than 0.12 per cent

expressed as H,SO,

It shall be free from Rodent hair and excreta

2.4.2 MAIDA:

1. Maida means the fine product made by milling or grinding clean wheat free from rodent hair and excreta and
bolting or dressing the resulting wheat meal. It shall conform to the following standards:—

Moisture Not more than 14.0 per cent
(when determined by heating at 130-133°C for 2 hours).
Total ash Not more than 1.0 per cent

(on dry weight basis).


[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 357

Ash insoluble in dilute HCl Not more than 0.1 percent (on dry weight basis).
Gluten (on dry weight basis). Not less than 7.5 per cent

Alcoholic acidity (with 90 per cent alcohol) Not more than 0.12 per cent

expressed as H,SO,

(on dry weight basis)

It shall be free from Rodent hair and excreta.

If the product is to be used for bakery purpose, the following flour treatment agents in the quantities mentioned
against each may be used, namely:—

Benzoyl peroxide (Max) 40 p.p.m.

Potassium bromate (Max) 20 p.p.m.

Ascorbic acid (Max) 200 p.p.m.

2. Fortified maida means the product obtained by adding one or more of the following materials to maida,
namely:—

(a) Calcium carbonate (preparated chalk popularly known as creta preparata).
(b) Iron,
(c) Thiamine,
(d) Riboflavin, and
(e) Niacin.
The calcium carbonate powder, if added for fortification, shall be in such amount that 100 parts by weight of

fortified maida shall contain not less than 0.30 and not more than 0.35 parts by weight of calcium carbonate. It shall
be free from Rodent hair and excreta.

3. Protein rich (paushtik) maida means the product obtained by mixing maida (wheat flour) with groundnut
flour "or soya flour; or a combination of both" up to an extent of 10.0 per cent soya flour which is a solvent extracted
flour used in such mix shall conform to the standards of soya flour laid down under regulation 2.4.13 (1). it shall be
free from insect or fungus infestation, odour and rancid taste. It shall not contain added flavour and colouring
agents or any other extraneous matter. It shall conform to the following standards:

Moisture Not more than 14.0 per cent

Total ash Not more than 1.4 per cent on dry basis.
Ash insoluble in dilute HCl Not more than 0.1 percent on dry basis.
Total Protein (N x 6.25) Not less than 12.5 percent on dry basis
Crude Fibre Not more than 0.53 per cent on dry basis
Alcoholic acidity (with 90 per cent alcohol) Not more than 0.12 per cent

expressed as H,SO,

Gluten Not less than 7.0 percent on dry basis

It shall be free from Rodent hair and excreta

2.4.3 SEMOLINA (Suji or Rawa):

1. Semolina (suji or rawa) means the product prepared from clean wheat free from rodent hair and excreta by
process of grinding and bolting. It shall be free from musty smell and off-odour and shall be creamy yellow in colour.
It shall conform to the following standards:—

Moisture Not more than 14.5 per cent

(when determined by heating at 130-133°C for 2 hours).
Total ash Not more than 1.0 per cent

(on dry weight basis).
Ash insoluble in dilute HCl Not more than 0.1 percent (on dry weight basis).

Gluten (on dry weight basis). Not less than 6.0 per cent


358 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]
Alcoholic acidity (with 90 per cent alcohol) Not more than 0.18 per cent
expressed as H,SO,
(on dry weight basis)

It shall be free from Rodent hair and excreta

2.4.4 BESAN:

1. Besan means the product obtained by grinding dehusked Bengal gram (Cicer arietinum) and shall not
contain any added colouring matter or any other foreign ingredient.

Besan shall conform to the following standards:—

Total ash Not more than 5.0%.
Ash insoluble in dilute hydrochloric acid Not more than 0.5%.
2.4.5 Pearl Barley (Jau)

1. Pearl Barley (Jau) shall be the product obtained from sound and clean barley (Horbeum vulgare or hordeum
distichon). It shall be whitish in colour and shall be free from fermented, musty or other objectionable taste or odour,
adulterants and insect and fungus infestation and rodent contamination. It shall not contain other foodgrains more
than 1 per cent by weight.

Barley powder shall be the product obtained by grinding clean and sound dehusked barley (Hordeum vulgare
or Hordeum distichon) grains. Barley starches shall not be less than 98.0 per cent by weight.

Barley powder shall also conform to the following standards namely:—

Total ash (on dry basis) Not more than 1.0%.

Ash insoluble in dilute

hydrochloric acid (on dry basis) Not more than 0.1%.

Crude fibre (on dry basis) Not more than 0.5%.
Alcoholic acidity (as H2S04) Not more than 0.10 per cent.

with 90 per cent alcohol)

2. Wholemeal barley powder or barley flour or choker yukt jau ka churan means the product obtained by
grinding clean and sound dehusked barley (Hordeum vulgare or Hordeum distichun) grains free from rodent hair
and excreta]. It shall conform to the following standards:—

Moisture Not more than 14.0 per cent

(when determined by heating at 130-133°C for 2 hours).
Total ash Not more than 3.0 per cent

(on dry weight basis).
Ash insoluble in dilute HCl Not more than 0.5 percent (on dry weight basis).
Alcoholic acidity (with 90 per cent alcohol) Not more than 0.17 per cent

expressed as H,SO, (on dry weight basis)

2.4.6 Food grains:

1. Food grains meant for human consumption shall be whole or broken kernels of cereals, millets and pulses.
In addition to the undermentioned standards to which foodgrains shall conform, they shall be free from Argemone,
Maxicana and Kesari in any form. They shall be free from added colouring matter. The foodgrains shall not contain
any insecticide residues other than those specified in regulation 2.3.1 of Food Safety and Satandards (Contaminats,
Toxins and Residues) Regulation, 2011 and the amount of insecticide residue in the foodgrains shall not exceed the
limits specified in Regulation 2.3.1. of the said Table Food Safety and standards (Contaminats, Toxins and Residues)
Regulatio, 2011. The foodgrains meant for grinding/processing shall be clean, free from all impurities including
foreign matter (extraneous matter).

2. Wheat
Description: Wheat shall be the dried mature grains of Triticum aestivum Linn. or Triticum vulgare vill, triticum

drum Desf., triticum sphaerococcum perc., Triticum dicoccum schubl., Triticum Compactum Host. It shall be sweet,
clean and wholesome. It shall also conform to the following standards namely:—


[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 359

(i) Moisture— Not more than 14 per cent by weight (obtained by
heating the pulverised grains at 130°C-133°C for two
hours).

(i) Foreign matter — Not more than | per cent. by weight of which not
(Extraneous matter) more than 0.25 per cent. By weight shall be mineral

matter and not more than 0.10 per cent. by weight
shall be impurities of animal origin.

(iii) Other edible grains Not more than 6 per cent by weight.

(iv) Damaged grainsu Not more than 6.0 per cent by weight including kernel
bunt afected grains and got affected grains. The
limit of kernel bunt affected grains and ergot affected
grains shall not exceed 3.0 per cent and 0.05 percent
by weight, respectively.

(v) Weevilled grains— Not more than 10 per cent by count.

(vi) Uric acid— Not more than 100 mg. per kg.

(vii) Aflatoxin Not more than 30 micrograms per kilogram

(viii) Deoxynivalenol (DON) Not more than 1000 micrograms per kilogram

Provided that the total of foreign matter, other edible grains and damaged grains shall not exceed 12 per cent
by weight.

3. MAIZE:

Maize shall be the dried mature grains of Zea mays Linn. It shall be sweet, hard, clean and wholesome. It shall
also conform to the following standards, namely:—

(i) Moisture- Not more than 16.0 per cent by weight (obtained by
heating the pulverised grains at 130°C-133°C for two
hours).

(i) Foreign matter — Not more than 1 per cent. by weight of which not

(Extraneous matter) more than 0.25 per cent. by weight shall be mineral

matter and not more than 0.10 per cent. by weight
shall be impurities of animal origin.

(iii) Other edible grains - Not more than 3 per cent by weight.
(iv) Damaged grains- Not more than 5 per cent by weight.
(v) Weevilled grains- Not more than 10 per cent by count.
(vi) Uric acid- Not more than 100 mg. per kg.
(vii) Aflatoxin Not more than 30 micrograms per kilogram.

Provided that the total of foreign matter, other edible grains and damaged grains shall not exceed 9 per cent by
weight.

4, JAWAR AND BAJRA:
Jawar and Bajra shall be the dried mature grains of Sorghum Vulgare Pers. and

Pennisetum - typhyoideum Rich, respectively. These shall be sweet, hard, clean and wholesome. These shall
also conform to the following standards, namely:—

(i) Moisture- Not more than 16.0 per cent by weight (obtained by
heating the pulverised grains at 130°C-133°C for two
hours).

(i) Foreign matter -Extraneous Matter Not more than | per cent. by weight of which not

more than 0.25 per cent. by weight shall be mineral
matter and not more than 0.10 per cent by weight
shall be impurities of animal origin.

(iii) Other edible grains Not more than 3 per cent by weight.


360 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

(iv) Damaged grains Not more than 6 per cent by weight our of which
ergot affected grains shall not exceed 0.05 percent
by weight.

(v) Weevilled grains Not more than 6 per cent by weight.

(vi) Uric acid Not more than 100 mg per kg

(vii) Aflatoxin Not more than 30 micrograms per kilogram.

Provided that the total of foreign matter, other edible grains and damaged grains shall not exceed 10 per cent
by weight.
5. RICE:

Rice shall be the mature kernels or pieces of kernels of Oryza sativa Linn. obtained from paddy as raw or par
boiled. It shall be dry, sweet, clean, wholesome and free from unwholesome poisonous substance. It shall also
conform to the following standards, namely:—

(i) Moisture- Not more than 16 per cent by weight (obtained by
heating the pulverised grains at 130°C-133°C for two
hours).

(i) Foreign matter - Not more than | per cent. by weight of which not
(Extraneous matter) more than 0.25 per cent. By weight shall be mineral

matter and not more than 0.10 per cent. by weight
shall be impurities of animal origin.

(iii) Damaged grains- Not more than 5 per cent by weight

(iv) Weevilled grains- Not more than 10 per cent by count.

(v) Uric acid- Not more than 100 mg. per kg.

(vi) Aflatoxin Not more than 30 micrograms per kilogram.

Provided that the total of foreign matter, and damaged grains shall not exceed 6 per cent by weight.
6. MASUR WHOLE:

Masur whole shall consist of lentil (lens culinaris Medik or Even lens Linn. or Lens esculenta Moench). It shall
be sound, dry, sweet, clean and wholesome. It shall conform to the following standards, namely:—

(i) Moisture- Not more than 14 per cent by weight (obtained by
heating the pulverized grains at 130°C 133°C fortwo
hours).

(ii) Foreign matter - Not more than | per cent. by weight of which not
(Extraneous matter) more than 0.25 per cent. by weight shall be mineral

matter and not more than 0.10 per cent. by weight
shall be impurities of animal origin

(iii) Other edible grains- Not more than 3 per cent by weight.

(iv) Damaged grains- Not more than 5 per cent by weight.

(v) Weevilled grains- Not more than 6 per cent by count.

(vi) Uric acid- Not more than 100 mg. per kg.
(vii) Aflatoxin Not more than 30 micrograms per kilogram.
Provided that the total of foreign matter, other edible grains and damaged grains shall not exceed 8 per cent by

weight.

7. URD WHOLE:

Urd whole shall consist of seeds of the pulses (phaseolus mungo Linn). It shall be sound, dry, sweet and
wholesome. It shall also conform to the following standards, namely:—

(i) Moisture- Not more than 14.0 per cent by weight (obtained by
heating the pulverised grains at 130°C-133°C for two
hours).


[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 361

(i) Foreign matter -Extraneous Matter Not more than | per cent. by weight of which not
more than 0.25 per cent. by weight shall be mineral
matter and not more than 0.10 per cent by weight
shall be impurities of animal origin.

(iii) Other edible grains Not more than 4 per cent by weight.
(iv) Damaged grains Not more than 5 per cent by weight.
(v) Weevilled grains Not more than 6 per cent by count.
(vi) Uric acid Not more than 100 mg per kg
(vii) Aflatoxin Not more than 30 micrograms per kilogram.

Provided that the total of foreign matter, other edible grains and damaged grains shall not exceed 9 per cent by
weight.

8. MOONG WHOLE:

Moong whole shall consist of seeds of green gram (Phaseolous aurues Roxb., Phaseolus radiatus Roxb.) It
shall be sound, dry, sweet, wholesome and free from admixture of unwholesome substances. It shall also conform to
the following standards, namely:—

(i) Moisture- Not more than 14 per cent by weight (obtained by
heating the pulverized grains at 130°C-133°C for two
hours).

(i) Foreign matter — Not more than 1 per cent. by weight of which not

(Extraneous matter) more than 0.25 per cent. by weight shall be mineral

matter and not more than 0.10 per cent. by weight
shall be impurities of animal origin.

(iii) Other edible grains - Not more than 4 per cent by weight.
(iv) Damaged grains- Not more than 5 per cent by weight.
(v) Weevilled grains- Not more than 6 per cent by count.
(vi) Uric acid- Not more than 100 mg. per kg.
(vii) Aflatoxin Not more than 30 micrograms per kilogram.

Provided that the total of foreign matter, other edible grains and damaged grains shall not exceed 9 per cent by
weight.
9, CHANA WHOLE:

Channa whole shall be the dried grains of gram (cicer arietinum Linn.) It shall be sound, clean, sweet, wholesome
and free from unwholesome substances. It shall also conform to the following standards, namely:—

(i) Moisture- Not more than 16 per cent by wight (obtained by
heating the pulverised grains at 130°C-133°C for two
hours).

(i) Foreign matter - Not more than 1 per cent. by weight of which not

(Extraneous matter) more than 0.25 per cent. by weight shall be mineral

matter and not more than 0.10 per cent. by weight
shall be impurities of animal origin.

(iii) Other edible grains - Not more than 4 per cent by weight.
(iv) Damaged grains- Not more than 5 per cent by weight.
(v) Weevilled grains- Not more than 10 per cent by count.
(vi) Uric acid- Not more than 100 mg. per kg.
(vii) Aflatoxin Not more than 30 micrograms per kilogram.

Provided that the total of foreign matter, other edible grains and damaged grains shall not exceed 9 per cent by
weight.


362 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

10. SPLIT PULSE (DAL) ARHAR:

Dal Arhar shall consist of husk and split seeds of red gram (Cajanus cajan (L) Millsp). It shall be sound, clean,
sweet, dry, wholesome and free from admixture of unwholesome substance. It shall also conform to the following
standards, namely:—

(i) Moisture- Not more than 14 per cent by weight (obtained by
heating the pulverized grains at 130°C-133°C for two
hours).

(i) Foreign matter - Not more than 1 per cent. by weight of which not
(Extraneous matter) more than 0.25 per cent. by weight shall be mineral

matter and not more than 0.10 per cent. by weight
shall be impurities of animal origin.

(iii) Other edible grains - Not more than 0.5 per cent by weight.
(iv) Damaged grains- Not more than 5 per cent by weight.
(v) Weevilled grains- Not more than 3 per cent by count.
(vi) Uric acid- Not more than 100 mg. per kg.
(vii) Aflatoxin Not more than 30 micrograms per kilogram.

Provided that the total of foreign matter, other edible grains and damaged grains shall not exceed 6 per cent by
weight.
11. SPLIT PULSE (DAL) MOONG:

Dal Moong shall consist of split seeds of green grams (Phaseolus aureus Roxb, Phaseolus raditus). It shall be
sound, clean, sweet, wholesome and free from unwholesome. It shall also conform to the following standards,

namely:—

(i) Moisture- Not more than 14 per cent by weight (obtained by
heating the pulverized grains at 130°C-133°C for two
hours).

(i) Foreign matter - Not more than 1 per cent. by weight of which not

(Extraneous matter) more than 0.25 per cent. by weight shall be mineral
matter and not more than 0.10 per cent. By weight
shall be impurities of animal origin.

(iii) Other edible grains - Not more than 4 per cent by weight.
(iv) Damaged grains- Not more than 5 per cent by weight.
(v) Weevilled grains- Not more than 3 per cent by count.
(vi) Uric acid- Not more than 100 mg. per kg.
(vii) Aflatoxin Not more than 30 micrograms per kilogram.

Provided that the total of foreign matter, other edible grains and damaged grains shall not exceed 8 per cent by
weight.
12. SPLIT PULSE (DAL) URD:

Dal Urd shall consist of split seeds of pulse (Phaseolus mungo Linn.) It shall be sound, dry, sweet, wholesome
and free from admixture of unwholesome substances. It shall also conform to the following standards, namely:—

(i) Moisture- Not more than 14 per cent by weight (obtained by
heating the pulverized grains at 130°C-133°C for two
hours).

(i) Foreign matter - Not more than 1 per cent. by weight of which not

(Extraneous matter) more than 0.25 per cent. by weight shall be mineral

matter and not more than 0.10 per cent. by weight
shall be impurities of animal origin.

(iii) Other edible grains - Not more than 4 per cent by weight.


[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 363

(iv) Damaged grains- Not more than 5 per cent by weight.
(v) Weevilled grains- Not more than 3 per cent by count.
(vi) Uric acid- Not more than 100 mg. per kg.
(vii) Aflatoxin Not more than 30 micrograms per kilogram.
Provided that the total of foreign matter, other edible grains and damaged grains shall not exceed 8 per cent by
weight.
13. DAL CHANA:

Dal Chana shall consist of split grains of gram (Cicer arietinum Linn), It shall be sound, clean, sweet, dry,
wholesome and free from admixture of unwholesome substances. It shall also conform to the following standards,

namely:—

(i) Moisture- Not more than 16 per cent by weight (obtained by
heating the pulverized grains at 130°C-133°C for two
hours).

(i) Foreign matter - Not more than | per cent. by weight of which not

(Extraneous matter) more than 0.25 per cent. by weight shall be mineral
matter and not more than 0.10 per cent. by weight
shall be impurities of animal origin.

(iit) Other edible grains Not more than 2 per cent by weight.
(iv) Damaged grains- Not more than 5 per cent by weight.
(v) Weevilled grains- Not more than 3 per cent by count.
(vi) Uric acid- Not more than 100 mg. per kg.
(vii) Aflatoxin Not more than 30 micrograms per kilogram.

Provided that the total of foreign matter, other edible grains and damaged grains shall not exceed 7 per cent by
weight.

14. SPLIT PULSE MASUR:

Dal masur shall consist of dehusked whole and split seed of the lentil (Lenil esculenta Moench or Lens

culinaris Medik or Ervem lens Linn). It shall be sound, clean, dry, sweet, wholesome and free from admixture of
unwholesome substances. It shall also conform to the following standards, namely:—

(i) Moisture- Not more than 14 per cent by weight (obtained by
heating the pulverized grains at 130°C-133°C for two
hours).

(i) Foreign matter - Not more than 1 per cent. by weight of which not

(Extraneous matter) more than 0.25 per cent. by weight shall be mineral

matter and not more than 0.10 per cent. by weight
shall be impurities of animal origin.

(iii) Other edible grains - Not more than 2 per cent by weight.
(iv) Damaged grains- Not more than 5 per cent by weight.
(v) Weevilled grains- Not more than 3 per cent by count.
(vi) Uric acid- Not more than 100 mg. per kg.
(vii) Aflatoxin Not more than 30 micrograms per kilogram.
Provided that the total of foreign matter, other edible grains and damaged grains shall not exceed 7 per cent by
weight.

15. Any other foodgrains not specified above shall conform to the following standards, namely:—

(i) Moisture- Not more than 16 per cent by weight (obtained by
heating the pulverized grains at 130°C-133°C for two
hours).


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

(i) Foreign matter - Not more than | per cent. by weight of which not
(Extraneous matter) more than 0.25 per cent. by weight shall be mineral
matter and not more than 0.10 per cent. by weight
shall be impurities of animal origin.

(iii) Other edible grains Not more than 6 per cent by weight.
(iv) Weevilled grains- Not more than 10 per cent by count.
(v) Damaged grains- Not more than 5 per cent by weight.
(vi) Uric acid- Not more than 100 mg. per kg.
(vii) Aflatoxin Not more than 30 micrograms per kilogram.

Provided that total of foreign matter, other edible grains and damaged grains shall not exceed 12.0 per cent by
weight.
Explanation — For the purposes of items in regulation 2.4.6 (2-14):—

(a) "foreign matter" means any extraneous matter other than foodgrains comprising of-

(i) inorganic matter consisting or metallic pieces, sand, gravel, dirt, pebbles, stones, lumps of
earth, clay and mud, animal filth and in the case of rice, kernels or pieces of kernels, if any, having
mudsticking on the surface of the rice, and

(ii) organic matter consisting of husk, straws, weed seeds and other inedible grains and also
paddy in the case of rice;

(b) poisonous, toxic and/or harmful seeds - means any seeds which is present in quantities above
permissible limit may have damaging or dangerous effect on health, organoleptic properties or technological
performance such as dhatura (D. fastur linn and D. stramonium linn), corn cokle (Agrostemma githago L,
Machai Lallium remulenum linn), Akra (Vicia species).

(c) "Damaged grains" means kernels or pieces of kernels that are sprouted or internally damaged as a
result of heat, microbe, moisture or whether, viz., ergot affected grain and kernel bunt grains;

(d) "Weevilled grains" means kernels that are partially or wholly bored by insects injurious to grains but
does not include germ eaten grains and egg spotted grains;

(e) "Other edible grains" means any edible grains (including oil seeds) other than the one which is under
consideration.

2.4.7 CORNFLOUR (Maize starch):
1, CORNFLOUR (Maize starch) means the starch obtained from maize (zea mays L.). It shall contain no added

colour, flavours or other chemicals. It shall be free from dirt, insects, larvae and impurities or other extraneous matter.
It shall conform to the following standards:—

Moisture Not more than 12.5%
Total ash Not more than 0.5 per cent
(on dry weight basis).
Ash insoluble in dilute HCl Not more than 0.1 percent
(on dry weight basis).
Alcoholic acidity (with 90 per cent alcohol) Shall be equivalent to not more than 2.0 ml. N. NaOH

per 100 g. of dried substance

2.4.8. CORN FLAKES:

1. CORN FLAKES means the product obtained from dehulled, degermed and cook corn (Zea mays L.) by
flaking, partially drying and toasting. It shall be in the form of crisp flakes of reasonably uniform size and golden
brown in colour. It shall be free from dirt, insects, larvae and impurities and any other extraneous matter. It shall
conform to the following standards:—

Moisture Not more than 7.5%

Total ash excluding salt Not more than 1.0 per cent
(on dry weight basis).


[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 365

Ash insoluble in dilute HCl Not more than 0.1 percent (on dry weight basis).

Alcoholic acidity (with 90 per cent alcohol) Shall be equivalent to not more than 2.0 ml. N. NaOH
per 100 g. of dried substance

2.4.9 CUSTARD POWDER:

1. CUSTARD POWDER means the product obtained from maize (Zea mays L.) or sago/topioca with or without
the addition of small quantities of edible starches obtained from arrowroot, potato or jawar (sorghum vulgare) and
with or without the addition of edible common salt, milk and albuminous matter. It may contain permitted colours and
flavours. It shall be free from any other foreign matter. It shall be the form of fine powder, free from rancidity,
fermented and musty odour. It shall conform to the following standards namely:—

Moisture Not more than 12.5%

Total ash excluding added common salt (on dry basis) Not more than 0.5 per cent

Ash insoluble in dilute HCl (on dry basis). Not more than 0.1 percent
2.4.10 MACARONI PRODUCTS:

1. PASTA PRODUCTS-(Macaroni, spaghetti, vermicelli) means the products obtained from suji or maida with
or without addition of ingredients like edible groundnut flour, tapioca flour, soya flour, milk powder, spices, vitamins,
minerals, by kneading the dough and extending it. It shall be free from added colour, dirt, insects larvae and
impurities or any other extraneous matter. It shall conform to the following standards:—

Moisture Not more than 12.5%

Total ash Not more than 1.0 per cent on dry basis
Ash insoluble in dilute HCl (on dry basis). Not more than 0.1 percent

Nitrogen Not less than 1.7 per cent on dry basis

2.4.11 MALTED AND MALT BASED FOODS

1. MALTED MILK FOOD means the product obtained by mixing whole milk, partly skimmed milk or milk
powder with the wort separately from a mash of ground barley malt, any other malted cereal grain and wheat flour or
any other cereal flour or malt extract with or without addition of flavouring agents and spices, emulsifying agents,
eggs, protein isolates, edible common salt, sodium or potassium bicarbonate, minerals and vitamins and without
added sugar in such a manner as to secure complete hydrolysis of starchy material and prepared in a powder or
granule or flake form by roller drying, spray drying, vacuum drying or by any other process. It may contain cocoa
powder. It shall be free from dirt and other extraneous matter. It shall not contain any added starch (except starch
natural to cocoa powder) and added non-milk fat. It shall not contain any preservative or added colour. Malted milk
food containing cocoa powder may contain added sugar. Malted milk food shall also conform to the following
standards, namely:—

(a)
(b)

(c)
(d)
(e)

(f)
(g)
(h)

Malted milkfood without Malted milkfood withcocoa powder
Cocoa powder
Moisture Not more than 5 per cent by weight. Not more than 5 per cent by weight
Total protein Not less than 12.5 per cent by weight. Not less than 11.25 per cent by weight.
(N x 6.25) (on dry basis)
Total fat (on Dry basis) Not less than 7.5% by weight Not less than 6% by weight.
Total ash (on dry basis) Not more than 5% by weight Not more than 5% by weight.
Acid insoluble ash Not more than 0.1 per cent by weight Not more than 0.1 per cent by weight
(on dry basis) (in dilute HCD)
Solubility Not less than 85% by weight. Not less than 80% by weight.
Cocoa powder (on dry basis) — Not less than 5.0% by weight.
Test for starch Negative —



366 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]
Malted milkfood without Malted milkfood withcocoa powder
Cocoa powder
(i) Bacterial count Not more than 50,000 per gram. Not more than 50,000 per gram.
G) Coliform count Not more than 10 per gram. Not more than 10 per gram.
(k) Yeast and mould count absent in 0.1 gm
() Salmonella and Shigella absent in 0.1 gm
(m) EColi absent in 0.1 gm
(n) Vibrio cholera and absent in 0.1 gm
V.Paraheamolyticus
(0) Faecal streptococci absent in 0.1 gm

and Staphylococcus aureas

2. MALT BASED FOODS (MALT FOOD) means the product obtained by mixing malt (wort or flour or malt
extract) of any kind obtained by controlled germination of seeds (cereals and/or grain legumes), involving mainly
steeping germination and kiln drying processes with other cereal and legume flour with or without whole milk or milk
powder, flavouring agents, spices, emulsifying agents, eggs, egg powder, protein isolates, protein hydrolysates,
edible common salt, liquid glucose, sodium or potassium bicarbonate minerals, amino acids and vitamins. It may
contain added sugar and/or cocoa powder and processed in such a manner to secure partial or complete hydrolysis
of starchy material in the form of powder or granules or flakes by drying or by dry mixing of the ingredients. The
grains, legumes and their products used in preparation of malt shall be sound, uninfested and free from insect
fragments, rat excreta, fungal infested grains or any other type of insect or fungal damage.

It shall also conform to the following standards, namely:—

(a) Moisture

Not more than 5 per cent, by weight
(b) Total Protein (N x 6.25) (on dry basis) - Not less than 7.0 per cent, by weight
(c) Total ash (on dry basis)

(d) Acid insoluble ash (in dilute HCl)

Not more than 5 per cent, by weight

Not more than 0.1 per cent, by weight

(e
(f) Coliform count
(g) Yeast and Mould Count

—

Total plate count

Not more than 50,000 per gram.

Not more than 10 per gram.

Not more than 100 per gram.

(h) EColi - Absent in 10 gram.

(i) Salmonella and Shigella - Absent in 25 gram

(j) Alcoholic Acidity - Not more than 0.30 per cent.
(expressed as H,SO,)
with 90 per cent alcohol
(on dry weight basis)

(k) Vibrio cholera and V.Paraheamolyticus absent in 0.1 gm

() Faecal streptococci and absent in 0.1 gm

Staphylococcus aureas

2.4.12 ROLLED OATS:

1, ROLLED OATS (quick cooking oats) means the product made from sound hulled oats (Avena sativa). It
shall be free from added colours, rancidity and flavouring agents. It shall be in the form of flakes of uniform size
having a light cream colour. It shall be free from dirt, insects and insect fragments. It shall conform to the following
standards:—

Moisture Not more than 10.0 %
Total ash Not more than 2.0 per cent on dry basis


[art II—ars 4]

ART AT UIA

: STR 367

Ash insoluble in dilute HCl (on dry basis).
Nitrogen

Crude Fibre

Alcohol acidity (with 90 per cent alcohol)

2.4.13 SOLVENTEXTRACTED FLOURS:

1. SOLVENT EXTRACT SOYA FLOUR means the product obtained from clean, sound healthy soyabeans by
a process of cracking, dehulling, solvent extraction with food grade hexane and grinding. It shall be in the form of
coarse or fine powder or grits, white to creamy white in colour of uniform composition and free from rancid and
objectionable odour, extraneous matter, insects, fungus, rodent hair and excreta. It shall be free from any added
colour and flavour. It shall conform to the following standards, namely:—

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(

(g)
(h)
@)

0)

Moisture

Total ash

Ash insoluble in dilute HCl
Protein (Nx6.25)

Crude fibre

Fat

Total bacterial count
Coliform bacteria
Salmonella bacteria

Hexane (Food grade)

Not more than 0.1 percent
Not less than 1.8 per cent on dry basis
Not more than 2.0 percent on dry basis

Shall be equivalent to not more than 8.0 ml. N.NaOH
per 100 gm. of dried substance.

Not more than 9.0 per cent by weight

Not more than 7.2 per cent by weight on dry basis
Not more than 0.4 per cent by weight on dry basis.
Not less than 48 per cent by weight on dry basis.
Not more than 4.2 per cent by weight on dry basis.
Not more than 1.5 per cent by weight on dry basis
Not more than 50,000 per gm.

Not more than 10 per gm.

Nilin 25 gm

Not more than 10.00 ppm

2. SOLVENT EXTRACTED GROUNDNUT FLOUR means the product obtained from fresh, clean, degermed
groundnut kernels which have been decuticled after mild roasting. The kernels shall be first expelled followed by
solvent extraction with food grade hexane or by direct extraction of kernels. It shall be whitish to light brown in
colour of uniform composition and shall be free from rancid and objectionable odour, extraneous matter, insect,
fungus, rodent hair and excreta. It shall be free from added colour and flavour. It shall conform to the following
standards namely :—

(a)
(b)
(c)

(d)

(
(g)
(h)
@)
0)

Moisture
Total ash
Ash insoluble in dilute HCl

Protein(Nx6.25)
Crude fibre

Fat

Total bacterial
Coliform bacteria
Salmonella bacteria

Hexane (Food grade)

Not more than 8.0 per cent by weight
Not more than 5.0 per cent by weight on dry basis

Not more than 0.38 per cent by weight on dry
basis.

Not less than 48 per cent by weight on dry basis.
Not more than 5.0 per cent by weight on dry basis.
Not more than 1.5 per cent by weight on dry basis
Not more than 50,000 per gm.count

Not more than 10 per gm.

Nilin 25 gm

Not more than 10.00 ppm

3. SOLVENT EXTRACTED SESAME FLOUR means the product obtained by pressing, clean, sound healthy
and decuticled sesame seeds followed by solvent extraction with food grade hexane or by direct extraction of
kernels. It shall be in the form of flour of white or pale creamy white colour, of uniform composition and free from


368

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY

[Part III—Sec. 4]

rancid and objectionable odour, extraneous matter, insects, fungus, rodent hair and excreta. It shall be free from
added colour and flavour. It shall conform to the following standards, namely :—

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(

(g)
(h)
@)

0)

(k)

Moisture

Total ash

Ash insoluble in dilute HCl
Protein (Nx6.25)

Crude fibre

Fat

Total bacterial count
Coliform bacteria
Salmonella bacteria

Oxalic Acid

Hexane (Food grade)

Not more than 9.0 per cent by Weight

Not more than 6.0 per cent by weight on dry basis
Not more than 0.15 per cent by weight on dry basis.
Not less than 47 per cent by weight on dry basis.
Not more than 6.0 per cent by weight on dry basis.
Not more than 1.5 per cent by weight on dry basis
Not more than 50,000 per gm.

Not more than 10 per gm.

Nil in 25 gm.

Not more than 0.5 per cent by weight content on dry
basis.

Not more than 10.00 ppm.

4, SOLVENT EXTRACTED COCONUT FLOUR means the product obtained from fresh coconut Kernels or
dried coconut copra of good quality and free from mould. Food grade hexane shall be used for extraction of the oil.
It shall be of white or pale brownish yellow colour of uniform composition and free from rancid and objectionable
odour, extraneous matter, insects, fungus, rodent hair and excreta. It shall be free from added colour and flavour. It

shall conform to the following standards, namely :—

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(

(g)
(h)
@)

0)

Moisture

Total ash

Ash insoluble in — dilute HC1
Protein (Nx6.25)

Crude fibre

Fat

Total bacterial -

Coliform bacteria

Salmonella bacteria

Hexane (Food grade)

Not more than 9.0 per cent by weight

Not more than 6.0 per cent by weight on dry basis
Not more than 0.35 per cent by weight on dry basis.
Not less than 22.0 per cent by weight on dry basis.
Not more than 9.0 per cent by weight on dry basis.
Not more than 1.5 per cent by weight on dry basis
Not more than 50,000 per gm.count

Not more than 10 per gm.
- Nilin25 gm.
Not more than 10.00 ppm.

5. SOLVENT EXTRACTED COTTON SEED FLOUR means the product obtained by solvent extraction of oil
with food grade hexane from oil cake immediately following the single pressing, from cotton seed of good quality
which have been pre-cleaned and are free from infected or otherwise damage materials and extraneous matter. It shall
be in the form of flour of white or pale brownish colour, of uniform composition and free from rancid and objectionable
odour, extraneous matter, insect, fungus, rodent hair and excreta. It shall be free from added colours and flavours. It

shall conform to the following standards, namely :—

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
)

Moisture

Total ash

Ash insoluble in dilute HCl
Crude Protein (Nx6.25)
Available lysine

Crude fibre

Not more than 8.0 per cent by weight

Not more than 5.0 per cent by weight on dry basis
Not more than 0.35 per cent by weight on dry basis.
Not less than 47 per cent by weight on dry basis.
Not less than 3.6 g. per 100 g. of crude protein.

Not more than 5.0 per cent by weight on dry basis.


[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 369

(g) Free gossypol Not more than 0.06 per cent by weight on dry basis.
(h) Total gossypol Not more than 1.2 percent by weight on dry basis.
(i) Fat Not more than 1.5 per cent by weight on dry basis.
(j) Total bacterial Count Not more than 50,000 per gm.
(k) Coliform bacteria Not more than 10 per gm.
() Salmonella bacteria Nilin 25 gm.
(m) Hexane (Food grade) - Not more than 10.00 ppm.”

2.4.14 STARCHY FOODS:

1, ARROWROOT means the separated and purified starch from the rhizomes of the plants known as Maranta
arundinacea or from Curcuma augustifolia.

2. SAGO shall mean small hard globules or pearls made from either the starch of the sago palm or the tubers of
topioca (Manihot utilissima) and shall be free from any extraneous matter including natural colours.

It shall conform to the following standards, namely:—

(i) total ash (on dry basis) shall not be more than 0.4 percent;
(i) ash insoluble in dilute hydrochloric acid (on dry basis). shall not exceed 0.1 percent
2.4.15 BAKERY PRODUCTS:

1. Biscuits including wafer biscuits shall be made from maida, vanaspati or refined edible oil or table butter or
desi butter or margarine or ghee or their mixture containing any one or more of the following ingredients, namely:—

Edible common salt, butter, milk powder, cereals and their products, cheese cocoa, coffee extract, edible
desiccated coconut, dextrose, fruit and fruits products, dry fruit and nuts, egg, edible vegetable products, ginger,
gluten groundnut flour, milk and milk products, honey, liquid glucose, malt products, edible oilseeds, flour and
meals, spices and condiments, edible starches such as potato starch and edible flours, sugar and sugar products,
invert sugar, jaggery, protein concentrates, oligofructose (max 15%) vinegar and other nutrients and vitamins:

Provided that it may contain food additives specified in these regulations inclulding Appendix A:

Provided further that it may contain artificial sweetener as provided in regulation 3.1.3 of these regulationsand
label declaration as provided in regulation 2.4.5 (24, 25, 26, 28 & 29) of Food Safety and Standards (Packaging and
Labeling) Regulations, 2011.

Provided also that it shall conform to following standards, namely:—

() ash insoluble in dilute hydrochloric acid (on dry basis): shall not be more than 0.1 per cent

(i) acidity of extracted fat (as oleic acid):- not exceeding 1.5 per cent.

It may contain Oligofructose (dietary fibres) upto 15% maximum subject to label declaration under Regulation
2.4.5 (43) of Food Safety and Standards (Packaging and Labeling) Regulations, 2011.

2. BREAD whether sold as white bread or wheat bread or fancy or fruity bread or bun or masala bread or milk
bread or of any other name, shall mean the product prepared from a mixture of wheat atta, maida, water, salt, yeast or
other fermentive medium containing one or more of the following ingredients, namely:—

Condensed milk, milk powder (whole or skimmed), whey, curd, gluten, sugar, gur or jaggery, khandsari, honey,
liquid glucose, malt products, edible starches and flour, edible groundnut flour, edible soya flour, protem concentrates
and isolates, vanaspati, margarine or refined edible oil of suitable type or butter or ghee or their mixture, albumin,
lime water, lysine, vitamins, spices and condiments or their extracts, fruit and fruit product (Candied and crystallized
or glazed), nuts, nut products , oligofructose (max 15%) and vinegar:

Provided that it may also contain food additives specified in these regulations including Appendix A:

Provided further that it may also contain artificial sweetener as provided in regulation 3.1.3 of this regulation
and label declaration in Regulation 2.4.5 (24, 25, 26, 28 & 29) of Food Safety and Standards (Packaging and Labeling)
Regulations, 2011.


370 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

Provided also that it shall conform to the following standards, namely:—

(a) alcoholic acidity (with 90 per cent alcohol) Shall be not more than equivalent of 7.5
ml. N NaOH per 100 g of dried substances.

(b) ash insoluble in dilute HCL on dry weight basis —
(i) bread except masala bread or fruit bread Not more than 0.1 per cent
(ii) masala bread or fruit bread Not more than 0.2 per cent

Provided also that it shall be free from dirt, insect and insect fragments, larvae, rodent hairs and added
colouring matter except any permitted food colours present as a carry over colour in accordance with the provision
in regulation 3.1.17, in raw material used in the products.

It may contain Oligofructose (dietary fibres) upto 15% maximum subject to label declaration under labelling
regulation 2.4.5 (43) of Food Safety and Standards (Packaging and Labeling) Regulations, 2011.

2.5. MEAT AND MEAT PRODUCTS

2.5.1 Definition:
(a)"animal” means an animal belonging to any of the species specified below;-
(i) Ovines;
(ii) Caprines;
(iii) Suillines;
(iv) Bovines;
and includes poultry and fish
(b) "carcass" means the dead body or any part thereof including the viscera of any animal which has been
slaughtered
(c) "meat" means the flesh and other edible parts of a carcass

(d) "meat food products" means any article of food or any article intended for, or capable of, being used as a
food which is derived or prepared from meat by means of drying, curing, smoking, cooking, seasoning, flavouring,
freezing or following a method of processing meat akin to any of the above methods, but shall not include the
following products

(i) Meat extracts, meat consommé and stock, meat sauces and similar products not containing fragments
of meat;

Gi) Whole, broken or crushed bones, meat peptones, animal gelatin, meat powder, pork-rind powder,
blood plasma, dried blood, dried blood plasma, cellular proteins, bone extracts and similar products;

(iii) Fats melted down from animal tissues;
(iv) Stomachs, bladders and intestines, clean and bleached, salted or dried;

(v) Products containing fragments of meat, but which contain a quantity of meat or meat product not
exceeding ten percent of the total weight of the final product;

(vi) Patties, puffs, rolls, samosas, cutlets, koftas, kababs, chops, tikkas and soups made from mutton,
chicken, goat meat, buffalo meat, beef and grilled chicken which are prepared for immediate consumption, the
ampoules of chicken essence, hot-dogs and hamburgers prepared for immediate consumption which can not
be stored even under refrigerated conditions;

(e) "Slaughter house” means the building, premises or place which is licensed as a slaughter house by
the local authority for the slaughter of animals intended for human consumption.

2.5.2 Meat and Meat Products:

1, CANNED CORNED BEEF means the product prepared from boneless meat of carcass of bovine animals
including buffalo meat, which have been subjected to ante-mortem and postmortem inspection.

The product shall be uniformly cured with edible common salt and sodium and / or potassium nitrite. The
product may contain ascorbic acid, sodium ascorbate or isoascorbate acid/ sodium iso-ascorbate singly or in


[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 371

combination not exceeding 500 mg/kg. The product may also contain sucrose, dextrose, lactose, maltose and
glucose syrup including corn syrup.

The product shall be packed in hermetically sealed containers and subjected to heat treatment followed by
rapid cooling to ensure that the product is shelf stable. The sealed containers shall not show any change on
incubation at 35°C for 10 days and 55°C for 5 days.

The product shall be in the form of a solid pack capable of being sliced.

The product shall be free from any added colour and natural and artificial flavour. The product shall be clean
and substantially free from staining and contamination from the container, foreign matter and objectionable odour.

The product shall conform to the following requirements, namely:—

SL No. Characteristics Requirements

(1) Total Plate Count 1000/ gram maximum
(2) E.Coli Absent in 25 gram
(3) Solmonella Absent in 25 gram
(4) Staphylococcus aureus Absent in 25 gram
(5) Clostridium perfringens and Clostridium botulinum Absent in 25 gram

2. CANNED LUNCHEON MEAT means the product prepared from edible portion of meat of mammalian
animal, slaughtered in an abattoir, which have been subjected to ante-mortem and postmortem inspection and/or
edible meat of poultry birds, including chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese, guinea fowl or pigeonslaughtered in an
abattoir.

The product shall be uniformly cured with edible common salt and sodium and /or potassium nitrite. The
product may be with or without binders such as cereal flour/starch, bread, biscuits or bakery products, milk powder,
whey powder, egg protein, vegetable protein products, glucose, invert sugar, dextrose, lactose, maltose, glucose
syrup, including corn syrup, spices, seasoning and condiments and water soluble hydrolysed protein.

The product may be smoked and flavoured with natural and natural identical flavours and permitted flavour
enhancer.

The product may contain ascorbic acid / isoascorbic acid and its sodium salts singly or in combination not
exceeding 500 mg/kg expressed as ascorbic acid as antioxidant and sodium and or potassium mono - di -
polyphosphates singly or in combination not exceeding 3000 mg/kg expressed as P205 as water retention agents.

The product shall be packed in hermetically sealed container and subjected to heat treatment followed by
rapid cooling to ensure that the product is shelf stable. The sealed container shall not show any change on
incubation at 35°C for 10 days and 55°C for 5 days.

The product shall be clean and substantially free from stains from the container and foreign matter and shall
be capable of being sliced.

The product shall conform to the following requirement, namely:—

SL No. Characteristics Requirements

(1) Total Fat content:

a) Product without binder Not more than 30.0 percent
b) Product with binder Not more than 35.0 percent
(2) Total Plate Count 1000/ gram maximum
(3) E.Coli Absent in 25 gram
(4) Salmonella Absent in 25 gram
(5) Staphylococcus aureus Absent in 25 gram
(6) Clostridium perfringens and Clostridium botulinum Absent in 25 gram

3. CANNED COOKED HAM means the product prepared from meat of pigs which have been subjected to
ante-mortem and postmortem inspection. The product shall be free from bones, detached cartilage tendous, ligaments
and may be with or without skin and fat. The product shall be uniformly cured with edible common salt and sodium
and / or potassium nitrite.


372

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

The product may contain sucrose, invert sugar, dextrose, lactose, maltose, glucose syrup including corn
syrup, honey, spices, seasoning and condiments, water soluble hydrolysed protein and food grade gelatin. The
product may be smoked and flavoured with natural flavouring substances and nature identical flavours as well as
permitted flavour enhancers. The product may contain ascorbic acid / isoascorbic acid and its sodium salt singly or
in combination not exceeding 500 mg/kg expressed as ascorbic acid, sodium and or potassium mono - di -
polyphosphates singly or in combination not exceeding 3000 mg/ kg expressed as P205 as antioxidant and water
retention agents respectively. The product may also contain sodium/potassium alginate not exceeding 10 mg/kg
and or agar, carrageenan and sodium citrate as emulsifying and stabilizing agents.

The product shall be packed in hermetically sealed containers and subjected to heat treatment followed by
rapid cooling to ensure that the product is shelf stable. The sealed containers shall not show any change on
incubation at 350C for 10 days and 550C for 5 days.

The product shall be free from any stains from the container/package, objectionable matter and shall be
capable of being sliced.

The product shall confirm to the following requirement, namely:—

SL No. Characteristics Requirements

(1) Total Plate Count 1000/ gram maximum
(2) E.Coli Absent in 25 gram
(3) Salmonella Absent in 25 gram
(4) Staphylococcus aureus Absent in 25 gram
(5) Clostridium perfringens and Clostridium botulinum Absent in 25 gram

4. | CANNED CHOPPED MEAT means the product prepared form edible portion of meat of mammalian
animals slaughtered in an abattoir, which have been subjected to ante-mortem and postmortem inspection and / or
edible meat of poultry birds including chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese, slaughtered in an abattoir.

The product shall be uniformly cured with edible common salt and Sodium or Potassium Nitrite. The product
may be with or without binders such as cereal flour/starch, bread, biscuit, or bakery product. Vegetable protein
product, fructose, invert sugar; dextrose, lactose, maltose, glucose syrup including corn syrup, spices, seasoning
and condiments and water soluble hydrolysed protein.

The product may be smoked and flavoured with natural and nature identical flavours and permitted flavour
enhancer.

The product may contain ascorbic acid / iso-ascorbic acid and its sodium salts singly or in combination
not exceeding 500 mg / kg expressed as ascorbic acid and sodium and or potassium mono-di-polyphosphate,
singly or in combination not exceeding 3000 mg/kg expressed as P205 as antioxidants and water retention
agent respectively.

The product shall be packed in hermetically sealed containers and subjected to heat treatment followed by
rapid cooling to ensure that the product is shelf stable. The sealed containers shall not show any change on
incubation at 35°C for 10 days and 55°C for 5 days.

The product shall be clean and substantially free from staining and contamination from the container,
foreign matter and shall be capable of being sliced.The product shall conform to the following requirements,
namely:—

SL No. Characteristics Requirements

(1) Total Fat content:
a) Product without binder Not more than 25.0 percent
b) Product with binder Not more than 30.0 percent


[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 373

(2) Total Plate Count 1000/ gram maximum
(3) E.Coli Absent in 25 gram
(4) Salmonella Absent in 25 gram
(5) Staphylococcus aureus Absent in 25 gram
(6) Clostridium perfringens and Clostridium Botulinum Absent in 25 gram

5. CANNED CHICKEN means the product prepared from edible portion of meat of poultry birds, slaughtered
in an abattoir, which have been subjected to ante-mortem and postmortem inspection. The product shall be free from
bones, blood clots, skin, hair, viscera and bruised/disintegrated material.

The product shall be cured with a mixture of edible common salt and sodium nitrite. The product shall be free
from added colour flavour and meat tenderized. The packing medium and other ingredients shall be of food grade
quality.

The product shall be packed in hermetically sealed clean and sound tin containers and subjected to adequate

heat treatment followed by rapid cooling to ensure that the product it shelf stable. The sealed containers shall not
show any change on incubation at 350C for 10 days and 550C for 5 days.

The contents shall have the characteristic colour, free from objectionable odour, discolouration and excessive
disintegration.

The product shall conform to the following requirements, namely:—

SL No. Characteristics Requirements

(1) Total Plate Count 1000/ gram maximum
(2) E.Coli Absent in 25 gram
(3) Salmonella Absent in 25 gram
(4) Staphylococcus aureus Absent in 25 gram
(5) Clostridium perfringens and Clostridium Botulinum Absent in 25 gram

6. CANNED MUTTON AND GOAT MEAT means the product prepared from edible portion of meat of sheep
and goat animals slaughtered in an abattoir, which have been subjected to ante-mortem and postmortem inspection.
The product shall be free from bones, blood clots, skin, hair, strings and fibrous tissue, bruised material, viscera,
tendons and excessive fat.

The product shall be cut into pieces of reasonably uniform size and cured with a mixture of edible salt and
sodium nitrate and or sodium nitrite. The product shall be free from added colour, flavour and meat tenderizer. The
packing medium and other ingredients shall be of food grade quality.

The product shall be packed in hermetically sealed clean and sound tin containers and subjected to adequate
heat treatment followed by rapid cooling to ensure that the product is shelf stable. The sealed container shall not
show any change on incubation at 350C for 10 days and 550C for 5 days.

The contents shall have characteristic colour, free from objectionable odour, discoloration and excessive
disintegration.

The product shall conform to the following requirements, namely:—

SL No. Characteristics Requirements

(1) Total plate count 1000/ gram maximum
(2) E.Coli Absent in 25 gram
(3) Salmonella Absent in 25 gram
(4) Staphylococcus aureus Absent in 25 gram
(5) Clostridium perfringens and Clostridium botulinum Absent in 25 gram

7, FROZEN MUTTON, CHICKEN, GOAT AND BUFFALO MEAT means the product prepared from edible
portion of meat of animals specified uder these regulationsincluding buffalo meat slaughtered in an abattoir, which
have been subjected to ante-mortem and postmortem inspection.

The fresh meat meant for freezing shall be clean, free from any foreign matter, objectionable odour/flavour and
evidence of deterioration. Meat shall be prepared by quickly freezing in an appropriate equipment in such a way that


374 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

the range of temperature of maximum crystallization is passed quickly and the product attains a temperature of -
180C or colder at the thermal centre after thermal stabilization. The product shall be kept deep frozen so as to
maintain its quality during transportation, storage and sale.

The product shall conform to the following requirements, namely:—

SL No. Characteristics Requirements

(1) Total Plate Count 100000/ gram maximum
(2) E.Coli 100/ gram maximum

(3) Staphylococcus aureus 100/ gram maximum

(4) Clostridium perfringens and Clostridium Botulinum 30/ gram maximum

(5) Yeast and mould count 1000/ gram maximum
(6) Salmonella Absent in 25 gram

(7) Listeria monocytogenes Absent in 25 gram

2.6. Fish and Fish Products:
2.6.1 Fish and Fish Products

1, Frozen Shrimps or Prawns means the product prepared from fresh shrimps of sound quality belonging to
Penaeidae, Pandalidae, Crangonidae, Palaeomonidae Solenoceridae, Aristeidae and Sergestidae families. The product
shall not contain a mixture of genera but may contain mixture of species of same genus with similar sensory
properties. The product may be peeled or unpeeled, raw or cooked. The product may be glazed with water. The
product shall conform to the following requirements:—

S.No. Characteristics Requirements in RawProduct Requirement in CookedProduct

(1) Total Volatile Base (Nitrogen) Not more than 30 mg/100 gm Absent in 25gm

2. Frozen Lobsters means the product prepared from fresh lobsters of sound quality belonging to the
genus Homarus of the family Nephropidae and from the families Palinuridae and Scyllaride. The Norway Lobster
may be prepared from Nephros norvegicus. The product shall not be a mixture of different species. The product may
be raw or cooked. The product may be glazed with water. The product shall conform to the following requirements:—

S.No. Characteristics Requirements in RawProduct Requirement in CookedProduct

(1) Total Volatile Base (Nitrogen) Not more than 30 mg/100 gm Absent in 25gm

3, Frozen squid and parts of squid means the product prepared from fresh squid of sound quality belonging
to squid species of Loliginidae, Ommastrephidae Onychoteuthide and Thysanotenthidae families. The product may
be glazed with water. No food additive is allowed in this product. The product shall conform to the following

requirements:
SL No. Characteristics Requirements
(1) Total Volatile Base (Nitrogen) Not more than 30 mg/100 gm

4, Frozen finfish means the product prepared from fresh fish of good quality. The product may be with or
without head from which viscera or other organs have been completely or partially removed. The product may be
glazed with water, The products shall conform to the following requirements:—

SL No. Characteristics Requirements
(1) Total Volatile Base (Nitrogen) Not more than 30 mg/ 100gm
(2) Histamine Not more than 20 mg/ 100gm

5. Frozen fish fillets or minced fish flesh or mixtures thereof are products obtained from fresh wholesome fish
of any species or mixtures of species with similar-sensory properties. Fillets may be pieces of irregular size and
shape with or without skin. Minced fish flesh consists of particles of skeletal muscle". and is free from bones,
viscera and skin. The product may be glazed with water. The products shall conform to the following requirement:-


[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 375

SL No. Characteristics Requirements
(1) Total Volatile Base (Nitrogen) Not more than 30 mg/ 100gm
(2) Histamine Not more than 20 mg/ 100gm

Note I: Products under article 1, 2, 3, 4 AND 5 shall be frozen in an appropriate equipment quickly to minus
(-) 18°C or colder in such a way that the range of temperature of maximum crystallization is passed quickly. The quick
freezing process shall not be regarded as complete unless the product temperature has reached minus (-) 18° C or
colder at the thermal centre after thermal stabilization. The product shall be kept deep frozen so as to maintain the
quality during transportation, storage and sale. The entire operation including processing and packaging shall
ensure minimum dehydration and oxidation. The product may contain food additives permitted in Appendix A
except listed product under regulation 2.6.1 (3). The product shall conform to the microbiological requirement given
in Appendix B. The products shall be free from any foreign matter and objectionable odour/flavour.

6. Dried shark fins means the product prepared from dorsal and pectoral fins, lower lobe of caudal fin and
Pelvic from fresh shark of edible quality. The product shall be free from adhering flesh and may be with or without
skin. The product shall be dried in a suitable manner and shall be free from any food additive. The product shall be
free from foreign matter, objectionable odour or flavour and rancidity. No food additive is allowed in this product.
The products shall conform to the following requirements:—

SL No. Characteristics Requirements

(1) Moisture Not more than 10.0 percent
(2) Ash insoluble in HCI on dry basis Not more than 1.0 percent
(3) Yeast and Mould Count Absent in 25gm

7. Salted fish/dried salted fish means the product prepared from fresh wholesome fish. The fish shall be bled,
gutted, beheaded, split or filleted and washed. The fish shall be fully saturated with salt (Heavy salted) or partially
saturated to a salt content not less than 10 percent by weight of the salted fish which has been dried. The product
shall be free from foreign matter, objectionable odour and flavour. The product may contain food additives permitted
in Appendix A. The product shall conform to the microbiological requirement given in Appendix B. The products
shall conform to the following requirements:—

SL No. Characteristics Requirements

(1) Moisture Not more than 16.0 percent

(2) Sodium chloride Not less than 10.0 percent and
not more than 15.0 percent

(3) Ash insoluble in HCI on dry basis Not more than 1.0 percent

(4) Yeast and Mould Count Absent in 25gm

8. Canned finfish means the product prepared from the flesh of fresh finfish of sound quality belonging to
any one species or mixture of species within the same genus having similar sensory properties. The product shall be
free from head, tail and viscera. The product may be packed in any suitable packing medium. The packing medium
and other ingredients used shall be of food grade quality. The products shall conform to the following requirements:—

SL No. Characteristics Requirements
(1) Histamine Content Not more than 20 mg/100 gm
(2) Total Volatile Base (Nitrogen) Not more than 30mg/ 100gm

9, Canned Shrimp means the product prepared from fresh shrimp of sound quality from any combination of
species of families Penaeidae, Pandalide, Crangonidae and Palaemonidae from which heads, shell and antenna have
been removed. The product may be in the form of peeled shrimps which have been headed and peeled without
removal of the dorsal tract or cleaned and deveined shrimps in which the back is cut open after peeling and dorsal


376

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

tract has been removed upto the last segment next to the tail or broken shrimps consisting of pieces of peeled shrimp
of less than four segments with or without the vein removed. The packing medium and other ingredients shall be of
food grade quality. The products shall conform to the following requirements:—

SL No. Characteristics Requirements
(1) Total Volatile Base (Nitrogen) Not more than 30 mg/100 gm
(2) Acidity in brine expressed as Citric Acid Not more than 0.2 percent

10. Canned sardines or sardine type products means, the product prepared from fresh or frozen fish belonging
to Sardinia pilchardus, Sardinia milanostictusl neopilchardusl ocellatus/sag ax/caeruleus, Sardinia aurita/brasiliensisl
maderensisl longicepsl gibbosa celupea harengus, Sprattus sprattus, Hypertophus vittatus, Nematolosaviaminghi,
Etrumeus teses, Ethmedium maculatun, Engranulis anchoita/mordax/ringens and opisthonema oglinum.

The product shall be free from head and gills. It may be free from scales and or tail. The fish may be eviscerated.
If eviscerated it shall be practically free from visceral parts other than roe milt or kidney. If ungutted it shall be
practically free from undigested feed or used feed. The product shall be packed in any suitable medium. The packing
medium and all other ingredients shall be of food grade quality. The products shall also conform to the following
requirements:—

SL No. Characteristics Requirements
(1) Histamine Content Not more than 20 mg/100 gm
(2) Total Volatile Base (Nitrogen) Not more than 30mg/100 gm

11. Canned salmon means the product prepared from fresh fish of sound quality belonging to any of the
species of Salmosalar or Oncorhynctus nerka/kisutchl tschawytscha/gorboscha/ketax and masou species. The
product shall be free from head, viscera, fins and tails. The product shall be packed in any suitable medium. The
packing medium and all other ingredients shall be of food grade quality. No food additive is allowed in this product.
The product shall conform to the following requirement.

SL No. Characteristics Requirements in Raw Product

(1) Total Volatile Base (Nitrogen) Not more than 30 mg/100 gm

12. Canned crab meat means the product prepared from live crabs of sound quality from any of the edible
species of the suborder Branchyura or the order Decapoda and all species of the family Lithodiadae. The product
shall be prepared singly or in combination from the leg, claw, body and shoulder meat from which the shell has been
removed. The product shall be packed in any suitable medium. The packing medium and all other ingredients shall
be of food grade quality. The products shall conform to the following requirements:—

SL No. Characteristics Requirements
(1) Total Volatile Base (Nitrogen) Not more than 30mg/100 gm
(2) Acidity in brine expressed as Citric Acid Not less than 0.06 percent and

Not more than 0.2 percent

13. Canned Tuna and Bonito means the product prepared from fresh fish of sound quality belonging to
Thunnus alalunga/albacaresl atlanticusl obessul maccoyiil thynnusl tongoe, Euthynnus affinisl alleteratusl Jinlatus/
Sarda chilentis/orienlalisl Sarda and Katsuwonus pelamis (syn Euthynnus pelamis) species. The product may be in
the form of segments with or without skin, chunks, flakes or grated / shredded particles. The product shall be packed
in any suitable medium. The packing medium and all other ingredients shall be of food grade quality. The products
shall conform to the following requirements:—

SL No. Characteristics Requirements
(1) Histamine Content Not more than 20mg/100 gm
(2) Total Volatile Base (Nitrogen) Not more than 30mg/100 gm

Note II: All the product listed under articles 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 and 13 shall be packed in hermetically sealed clean
and sound containers and subjected to adequate heat treatment followed by rapid cooling to ensure commercial
sterility. The container shall be free from rust and mechanical defects. The container shall not show any change or


[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 377

incubation at 37°C for 7 days. The final product shall be free from foreign matter, objectionable odour, or flavour. The
products may contain food additives permitted in Appendix A except products listed under regulation 2.6.1 (11). The
product shall conform to the microbiological requirement given in Appendix B.

Note- Without prejudice to the standards laid down in this Appendix, whenever water is used in the manufacture
or preparation of any article of food, such water shall be free from micro-organisms likely to cause disease and also
free from chemical constituents which may impair health.

2.7. SWEETS & CONFECTIONERY:

2.7.1 Sugar boiled confectionery:

Sugar boiled confectionery whether sold as hard boiled sugar confectionery or pan goods confectionery or
toffee or milk toffee or modified toffee or lacto-bon-bon or by any other name shall mean a processed composite
food article made from sugar with or without doctoring agents such as cream of tartar by process of boiling whether
panned or not. It may contain centre filling, or otherwise, which may be in the form of liquid, semi-solid or solids with
or without coating of sugar or chocolate or both. It may also contain any of the following:—

0)

(ii)
(tit)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
(vii)
(viii)
(ix)

(x)

(xi

a

(xii)
(xii)
(xtv)
(xv)
(xvi)
(xvii)

(xviii)
(xix)

(xx)
(xxl)
(xxl)

(xxiii)
(xxtv)

(xxv)

sweetening agents such as sugar, invert sugar, jaggery, lactose, gur, bura sugar, khandsari, sorbitol,
honey, liquid glucose;

milk and milk products;

edible molasses;

malt extracts;

edible starches;

edible oils and fats;

edible common salts;

fruit and fruit products and nut and nut products;
tea extract, coffee extract, chocolate, cocoa;
vitamins and minerals;

shellac (food grade) not exceeding 0.4 per cent by weight bee wax (food grade), paraffin wax food grade,
carnauba wax (food grade), and other food grade wax or any combination thereof;

edible desiccated coconut;

spices and condiments and their extracts;
candied peels;

enzymes;

permitted stabilizing and emulsifying agents;
edible foodgrains; edible seeds;

baking powder;

gulkand, gulabanafsha, mulathi;

puffed rice;

china grass;

eucalyptus oil, camphor, menthol oil crystals, pepper mint oil;
thymol;

edible oil seed flour and protein isolates;

gum arabic and other edible gum.

It shall also conform to the following standards, namely:—

0)

Ash sulphated (on salt free basis) Not more than 2.5 per cent by weight.


378 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

Provided that in case of sugar boiled confectionery where spices are used as centre filling, the ash sulphated
shall not be more than 3 per cent by weight.

(i) Ash insoluble (in dilute Hydrochloric acid) | Not more than 0.2 Per cent by weight.

Provided that in case of sugar boiled confectionery where spices are used as centre filling, the ash insoluble
in dilute Hydrochloric acid shall not be more than 0.4 per cent.

Where the sugar boiled confectionery is sold under the name of milk toffee and butter toffee, it shall conform
to the following additional requirements as shown against each;

(1) Milk toffee-
(i) Total protein (N x 6.25) shall not be less than 3 per cent by weight on dry basis.
(ii) Fat content shall not be less than 4 per cent by weight on dry basis.
(2) Butter toffee- fat content shall not be less than 4 per cent by weight on dry basis.
Provided that it may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including appendix 'A'.

Provided further that if artificial sweetener has been added as provided in Regulation 3.1.3, it shall be declared
on the label as provided in regulation 3.1.3, it shall be declared on the label as provided inRegulation 2.4.5 (24, 25, 26,
28 & 29) of Food Safety and Standards (Packaging and Labeling) Regulations, 2011.

2.7.2: Lozenges:

Lozenges shall mean confections made mainly out of pulverised sugar, or icing sugar with binding materials
such as edible gums, edible gelatine, liquid glucose or dextrin and generally made from cold mixing which does not
require primary boiling or cooking of the ingredients. It may contain any of the following:—

(i) sweetening agents such as dextrose, dextrosemonohydrate, honey, invert sugar, sugar, jaggery, bura
sugar, khandsari, sorbitol, liquid glucose;

(i) milk and milk products;
(iii) nuts and nuts products;
(iv) malt syrup;

(v) edible starches;

(vi) edible common salt;

(vii) ginger powder or extracts;
(viii) cinnamon powder or extracts;
(ix) aniseed powder or extracts;
(x) caraway powder or extracts;

(xi) cardamom powder or extracts;
(xii) cocoa powder or extracts;
(xiii) protein isolates;

(xiv) coffee-extracts or its flavour;

permitted colouring matter;

7

(xv,
(xvi) permitted emulsifying and stabilizing agents
(xvii) vitamins and minerals;
It shall also conform to the following standards:
(i) Sucrose content Not less than 85.0 per cent by weight.
(i) Ash Sulphated (salt free basis) Not more than 3.0 percent by weight
(ii) Ash insoluble in dilute Hydrochloric acid Not more than 0.2 per cent by weight

The product may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A.


[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 379

Provided that if artificial sweetener has been added in the product as provided in the regulation 3.1.3, it shall
be declared on the label as provided in Regulation 2.4.5 (24, 25, 26, 28 & 29) of Food Safety and Standards
(Packaging and Labeling) Regulations, 2011.

Provided further that if only permitted artificial sweetener is used in the products as sweetener, the requirement
for sucrose prescribed in these standards shall not be applicable to such products.

2.7.3: Chewing gum and bubble gum

Chewing gum and bubble gum shall be prepared from chewing gum base, or bubble gum base, natural or
synthetic, non-toxic; cane sugar and liquid glucose (corn syrup).

The following sources of gum base may be used:—

(1) Babul, Kikar (gum Arabic)
(2) KHAIR
(3) Jhingan (Jael)
(4) Ghatti
(5) Chiku (Sapota)
(6) Natural rubber latex
(7) Synthetic rubber latex
(8) Glycerol ester of wood resin
(9) Glycerol ester of gum resin

(10) Synthetic resin

(11) Glycerol ester or partially hydrogenated gum or wood resin.

(12) Natural resin

(13) Polyvinyl acetate

(14) Agar (food grade)

It may also contain any of the following ingredients, namely:—

(a) Malt
(b) Milk powder
(c) Chocolate
(d) Coffee
(e) Gelatin, food grade
(f) Permitted Emulsifiers
(g) Water, potable
(h) Nutrients like Vitamins, minerals, proteins

It shall be free from dirt, filth, adulterants and harmful ingredients. it shall also conform to the following
standards, namely:—

Ingredients Chewing gum Bubble gum
(@) Gun Not less than 12.5 per cent by weight = Not less than 14.0 per cent by weight
(i) Moisture Not more than 3.5 per cent by weight Not more than 3.5 per cent by weight
(i) Sulphated Ash Not more than 9.5 per cent by weight. | Not more than 11.5 per cent by weight.
(iv) Acid insoluble ash Not more than 2.0 per cent by weight. | Not more than 3.5 per cent by weight.
(v) Reducing sugars Not less than 4.5 per cent by weight. Not less than 5.5 per cent by weight.
(calculated as dextrose)
(vi) Sucrose Not more than 70.0 per cent by weight. Not more than 60.0 percent by weight.



380

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

Provided that it may contain food additives permitted in and these regulations Including Appendix A

Provided further, if artificial sweetener has been added as provided in Regulation 3.1.2 (1), it shall be declared
on the label as provided in Regulation 2.4.5 (24, 25, 26, 28 & 29) of Food Safety and Standards (Packaging and
Labeling) Regulations, 2011.

Provided also, that, if only artificial sweetener is added in the product as sweeteners the parameters namely,
reducing sugars and sucrose prescribed in the table above shall not be applicable to such product
2.7.4: Chocolate

Chocolate means a homogeneous product obtained by an adequate process of manufacture from a mixture of
one or more of the ingredients, namely, cocoa beans, cocoa nib, cocoa mass, cocoa press cake and cocoa dust
(cocoa fines/powder), including fat reduced cocoa powder with or without addition of sugars, cocoa butter, milk
solids including milk fat The chocolates shall not contain any vegetable fat other than cocoa butter.

The material shall be free from rancidity or off odour, insect and fungus infestation, filth, adulterants and any
harmful or injurious matter.

The chocolates shall be of the following types:—

Milk chocolates is obtained from one or more of cocoa nib, cocoa mass, cocoa press cake, cocoa powder
including low-fat cocoa powder with sugar and milk solids including milk fat and cocoa butter.

Milk Covering Chocolate - as defined above, but suitable for covering purposes.

Plain Chocolate is obtained from one or more of cocoa nib, cocoa mass, cocoa press cake, cocoa powder
including low fat cocoa powder with sugar and cocoa butter.

Plain Covering Chocolate-same as plain chocolate but suitable for covering purposes.
Blended Chocolate means the blend of milk and plain chocolates in varying proportions.
White chocolate is obtained from cocoa butter, milk solids, including milk fat and sugar.

Filled Chocolates means a product having an external coating of chocolate with a centre clearly distinct
through its composition from the external coating, but does not include flour confectionery pastry and biscuit
products. The coating shall be of chocolate that meets the requirements of one or more of the chocolate types
mentioned above. The amount of chocolate component of the coating shall not be less than 25 per cent of the total
mass of the finished product.

Composite Chocolate-means a product containing at least 60 per cent of chocolate by weight and edible
wholesome substances such as fruits, nuts. It shall contain one or more edible wholesome substances which shall
not be less than 10 per cent of the total mass of finished product.

Provided that it may contain artificial sweeteners as provided in regulation 3.1.3 and label declaration as
provided under Regulation 2.4.5 (24, 25, 26, 28 & 29) of Food Safety and Standards (Packaging and Labeling)
Regulations, 2011.

Provided further that in addition to the ingredients mentioned above, the chocolate may contain one or more
of the substances as outlined below, under different types of chocolates.

(a) edible salts
(b) spices and condiments
(c) permitted emulsifying and stabilizing agents
(d) permitted sequestering and buffering agents.
The product may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A.

Chocolates shall also conform to the following standards namely:—


[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 381

SL Characteristics Requirements for
No. Milk Milk Plain Plain White Blended
Chocolate Covering Chocolate Covering Chocolate Chocolate
Chocolate Chocolate

1. Total fat (on dry basis) 25 25 25 25 25 25
per cent by weight.
Not less than

2. Milk fat (on dry basis) 2 2 - - 2 —
Percent by weight.
Not less than

3. Cocoa solids 2.5 2.5 12 12 - 3.0

(on Moisture-free and
fat free basis)

percent by weight
Not less than

4. Milk Solids (on Moisture-free and
fat-free basis) percent by weight.

a) Not less than 10.5 10.5 - - 10.5 1

b) Not more than - - - - - 9
5. Acid insoluble ash

(on moisture fat and sugar

free basis) percent by weight.

Not more than 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2

2.7.5: ICE LOLLIES OR EDIBLE ICES

1.,"ICE LOLLIES OR EDIBLE ICES" means the frozen ice produce which may contain sugar, syrup, fruit, fruit
juices, cocoa, citric acid, permitted flavours and colours. It may also contain permitted stabilizers and/or emulsifiers
not exceeding 0.5 per cent by weight. It shall not contain any artificial sweetner.

Ice Candy means the product obtained by freezing a pasteurized mix prepared from a mixture of water, nutritive
sweeteners e.g. sugar, dextrose, liquid glucose, dried liquid glucose, honey, fruits and fruit products, coffee, cocoa,
ginger, nuts and salt. The product may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices. It
shall conform to the microbiological requirements prescribed in Appendix B. It shall conform to the following
requirement:—

Total sugars expressed as Sucrose ... Not less than 10.0 percent

2.8: Sweetening agents including Honey

2.8.1: SUGAR

1, PLANTATION WHITE SUGAR (commonly known as sugar) means the crystallised product obtained from
sugarcane or sugar beet. It shall be free from dirt, filth, iron filings, and added colouring matter. Extraneous matter
shall not exceed 0.1 per cent by weight. It shall also conform to the following standards, namely :—

(a) Moisture (when heated at 105 degree + 1° degree C for 3 hours) Not more than 0.5 per cent by weight.
(b) Sucrose Not less than 98 per cent by weight.

The product may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices.

2, REFINED SUGAR means the white crystallised sugar obtained by refining of plantation white sugar. It shall
be free from dirt, filth, iron filings and added colouring matter. Extraneous matter shall not exceed 0.1 per cent by
weight. It shall also conform to the following standards, namely:—

(a) Moisture (when heated at 105° + 1°C for 3 hours) Not more than 0.5 per cent by weight.
(b) Sucrose Not less than 99.5 per cent by weight.

The product may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices.


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

3. KHANDSARI SUGAR obtained from sugarcane juice by open pan process may be of two varieties, namely:
(i) Khandsari Sugar Desi; and
(ii) Khandsari Sugar (sulphur) also known as "Sulphur Sugar".

It may be crystalline or in powder form. It shall be free from dirt, filth, iron filings and added colouring matter.
Extraneous matter shall not exceed 0.25 per cent by weight. It may contain sodium bicarbonate (food grade). It shall
also conform to the following standards, namely:—

Khandsari Sugar (Sulphur Sugar) | Khandsari Sugar (Desi)

7

7

Moisture (when heated Not more than 1.5 per cent by weight. Not more than 1.5 per cent

at 105° + 1° C for 3 hours) by weight.

Ash insoluble in dilute hydrochloric acid Not more than 0.5 per cent by weight Not more than 0.7 per cent
by weight.

Sucrose Not less than 96.5 per cent by weight. Not less than 93.0 per cent
by weight.

The product may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices.

NOTE: - Khandsari sugar can be distinguished from plantation white sugar on the following characteristics,
namely:

Khandsari Sugar (Sulphur Sugar) | Khandsari Sugar (Desi)

7

wa

Conductivity (106 mho/cm2) 100-300 in 5% solution at 30°C Not more than 100 in 5%
solution at 30°C
Calcium oxide (mg/100gms) Not more than 100 Not more than 50

The product may contain food additives in Appendix A

4, BURA SUGAR means the fine grain size product made out of any kind of sugar. It shall be free from dirt, filth,
iron filing and added colouring matter. Extraneous matter shall not exceed 0.1 per cent by weight. It shall also
conform to the following standards, namely:—

(a) Sucrose Not less than 90.0 per cent by weight.
(b) Ash insoluble in dilute hydrochloric acid Not more than 0.7 per cent by weight.
The product may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices.

5. CUBE SUGAR means the sugar in the form of cube or cuboid blocks manufactured from refined crystallised
sugar. It shall be white in colour, free from dirt and other extraneous contamination. It shall conform to the following
standards :—

(a) Sucrose Not less than 99.7 per cent by weight.
(b) Moisture Not more than 0.25 per cent by weight.
(c) Total ash Not more than 0.03 per cent by weight

The product may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices.

6. ICING SUGAR means the sugar manufactured by pulverizing refined sugar or vacuum pan (plantation
white) sugar with or without edible starch. Edible starch, if added, shall be uniformly extended in the sugar. It shall
be in form of white powder, free from dust, or any other extraneous matter.

The product may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices. It shall conform to
the following standards:—

(a) Total starch and sucrose (moisture free) Not less than 99.0 per cent by weight.
(b) Moisture Not more than 0.80 per cent by weight.
(c) Starch Not more than 4.0 percent by weight on dry basis.


[art II—ars 4]

FRA AT USTIA + STH 383

2.8.2: MISRI

1. MISRI means the product made in the form of candy obtained from any kind of sugar or palmyrah juice. It
shall be free from dirt filth, iron filings and added colouring matter. Extraneous matter shall not exceed 0.1 per cent by

weight. It shall also conform to the following standards, namely:—

(a)

(b) Total Sugar (Called, known or expressed as Sucrose)

Total ash

Not more than 0.4% by weight
Not less than 98.0% by weight

The product may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices.

2.8.3: "HONEY"

1, HONEY means the natural sweet substance produced by honey bees from the nectar of blossoms or from
secretions of plants which honey bees collect, transform store in honey combs for ripening.

When visually inspected, the honey shall be free from any foreign matter such as mould, dirt, scum, pieces of
beeswax, the fragments of bees and other insects and from any other extraneous matter.

The colour of honey vary from light to dark brown. Honey shall conform to the following standards, namely:—

(a) Specific gravity at 27°C Not less than 1.35
(b) Moisture Not more than 25 per cent by mass
(c) Total reducing sugars Not less than 65.0 per cent by mass

(d)

(i) for Carbia colossa and Honey dew
Sucrose

(i) for Carbia colossa and Honey dew

Not less than 60 per cent by mass
Not more than 5.0 per cent by mass

Not more than 10 per cent by mass

(e) Fructose-glucose ratio Not less than 0.95 per cent by mass
(f) Ash Not more than 0.5 per cent by mass
(g) Acidity (Expressed as formic acid) Not more than 0.2 per cent by mass
(h) Fiehe's test Negative

() Hydroxy methyl furfural (HMF), mg/kg Not more than 80

If Fiehe's test is positive, and hydroxy methyl furfural (HMF) content is more than 80 milligram/kilogram then

fructose glucose ratio should be 1.0 or more.

2.8.4: GUR OR JAGGERY

1. GUR OR JAGGERY means the product obtained by boiling or processing juice pressed out of sugarcane or
extracted from palmyra palm, date palm or coconut palm. It shall be free from substances deleterious to health and
shall conform to the following analytical standards, on dry weight basis :-

Total sugars expressed as invert sugar

Extraneous matter insoluble in water
Total ash
Ash insoluble in hydrochloric acid (HCl)

Not less than 90 percent and sucrose not less than
60 percent

Not more than 2 per cent.
Not more than 6 per cent

Not more than 0.5 per cent

Gur or jaggery other than that of the liquid or semi liquid variety shall not contain more than 10% moisture.

The product may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices.

Sodium bicarbonate, if used for clarification purposes, shall be of food grade quality.

2.8.5: DEXTROSE

1, DEXTROSE is a white or light cream granular powder, odourless and having a sweet taste.

When heated with potassium cupritartarate solution it shall produce a copious precipitate of cuprous oxide.

It shall conform to the following standards:—


384 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]
Sulphated ash Not more than 0.1 per cent on dry basis
Acidity 0.5 gm. Dissolved in 50 ml. of freshly boiled and

cooled water requires for neutralisation not more
than 0.20 ml. of N/10 sodium hydroxide to
phenolphthalein indicator.

Glucose Not less than 99.0 per cent on dry basis.

The product may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices.

2.8.6: GOLDEN SYRUP

1. GOLDEN SYRUP means the syrup obtained by inversion of sugar. It shall be golden yellow in colour,
pleasant in taste and free from any crystallisation.

It shall conform to the following standards:—

Moisture Not more than 25.0 per cent by weight
Total Ash Not more than 2.5 per cent by weight
Total Sugar as invert sugar Not less than 72.0 per cent by weight

The product may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A.

Sodium bicarbonate, if used, for clarification purposes, shall be of Food Grade Quality.

2.8.7 DRIED GLUCOSE SYRUP means the material in the form of coarse or fine, white to creamish white powder,
sweet to taste, bland in flavour and somewhat hygroscopic. It shall be free from fermentation, evidence of mould
growth, dirt or other extraneous matter or added sweetening or flavouring agent.

It shall also not contain any added natural or coaltar food colour. It shall conform to the following standards:—

Total solid contents Not less than 93.0 per cent by weight.
Reducing sugar content Not less than 20.0 per cent by weight.
Sulfated Ash Not more than 1.0 per cent by weight.

The product may contain food additives permitted in these Regulations and Appendices.

2.8.8: SACCHARIN SODIUM

1, SACCHARIN SODIUM commonly known as soluble Saccharin having an empirical formula as C, Hy
NNaO3S.2H?0 and molecular weight as 241.2 shall be the material which is soluble at 20°C in 1.5 parts of water and
50 parts of alcohol (95 per cent); and shall contain not less than 98.0 per cent and not more than the equivalent of
100.5 per cent of C; H, O; NSNa calculated with reference to the substance dried to constant weight at 105°C, assay
being carried out as presented in Indian Pharmacopoeia. It shall not contain more than 2 p.p.m. of arsenic and 10
p.p.m. of lead. The melting point of Saccharin isolated from the material as per Indian Pharmacopoeia method shall
be between 226°C and 230°C. The loss on drying of the material at 105°C shall not be less than 12.0 per cent and not
more than 16.0 per cent of its weight.

The material shall satisfy the tests of identification and shall conform to the limit tests for free acid or alkali,
ammonium compounds and parasulpha moylbenzoate as mentioned in the Indian Pharmacopoeia.

2.8.9: ASPARTYL PHENYLALANINE METHYL ESTER (ASPERTAME)

1, Aspartyl Phenyl Alanine Methyl Ester commonly known as Aspertame, having empirical formula as C, 4H)
N, O, and molecular weight as 294,31 shall be the material which is slightly soluble in water and Methanole. It shall
contain not less than 98 per cent and not more than 102 per cent of Aspertame on dried basis. It shall not contain
more than 3 ppm of Arsenic and 10 ppm of Lead.

The loss on drying of the material at 105°C for 4 hours shall not be more than 4.3 per cent of its weight.
The sulphate ash shall not be more than 0.2 per cent. It shall not contain more than | per cent of diketo-piper-
azine.


[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 385

2.8.10: Acesulfame Potassium

1. Acesulfame Potassium commonly known as Acesulfame-K, having empirical formula C,H ,KNO,S, molecular
weight as 201.24 shall be the material which is odourless, white crystalline powder having intensely sweet taste and
is very slightly soluble in ethanol but freely soluble in water. It shall contain not less than 99 per cent and not more
than 101 per cent of Acesulfame-K on dried basis. It shall not contain more than 3 ppm. Flouride. Heavy metals
content shall not be more than 10 ppm. The loss on drying of material at 105 degree centigrade for two hours shall
not be more than 1 percent of its weight.

2.8.11: Sucralose
1. Sucralose:
Chemical name - 1, 6-Dichloro-1, 6-Dideoxy-?-D-Fructofuranosyl-4-Chloro-4-Deoxy-a-D-galactopyranoside;
Synonyms -4, | '6'-Trichlorogalactosucrose; INS 955
Chemical formula - C}4H,9C1,0g
Molecular weight- 397.64

It shall be white to off-white, odourless, crystalline powder, having a sweet taste. It shall be freely soluble in
water, in methanol and in alcohol and slightly soluble in ethyl acetate. It shall contain not less than 98.0% and not
more than 102.0% of C}5H C10 calculated on anhydrous basis. It shall not contain more than 3PPM of Arsenic
(as AS) and 10PPM or heavy metals (as Pb). It shall not contain more than 0.1% of methanol. Residue on ignition
shall not be more than 0.7% and water not more than 0.2%.

2.9: SALT, SPICES, CONDIMENTS AND RELATED PRODUCTS
Note: (1) The extraneous matter wherever prescribed, shall be classified as follows:
a. Organic extraneous matter such as chaff, stems, straw

b. Inorganic extraneous matter such as dust, dirt, stones and lumpsof earth. This shall not exceed 2
percent by weight of the total Extraneous matter

(a) All the Spices, condiments and related products from 2.9.1 to 2.9.29 shall conform to the microbiological
requirements given in table 3 of Appendix B.

2.9.1: Caraway (Siahjira):

1. (Siahjira) whole means the mericarps of nearly mature fruit of Carum carvi L. The fruits are split into two
mericarps by thrashing after drying. It shall have characteristic flavour and shall be free from extraneous flavour and
mustiness. It shall be free from mould, living and dead insects, insect fragments, rodent contamination. It shall be
free from attack by Screlotinia mushrooms. It shall be free from added colouring matter and other harmful substances.

It shall conform to the following standards:—

(i) Extraneous matter

(i) Moisture

(ii) Total ash on dry basis

(iv) Ash insoluble in dilute HCI on dry basis.
(v) Volatile oil content on dry basis

(vi) Insect damaged matter

Not more than 1.0 percent by weight
Not more than 13.0 percent by weight
Not more than 8.0 percent by weight
Not more than 1.5 percent by weight
Not less than 2.5 percent by (v/w).

Not more than 1.0 percent by weight

Blond Caraway (Carum carvi) whole is slightly larger and its colour is paler.

2. Caraway Black (Siahjira) Whole means the dried seeds of Carum bulbocastanum. It shall conform to the

following standards.
(i) Extraneous matter
(i) Moisture
(ii) Total ash on dry basis
(iv) Ash insoluble in dilute HCI on dry basis.
(v) Volatile oil content on dry basis
(vi) Insect damaged matter

Not more than 1.0 percent by weight
Not more than 12.0 percent by weight
Not more than 9.0 percent by weight
Not more than 2.0 percent by weight
Not less than 1.5 percent by (v/w)

Not more than 1.0 percent by weight


386

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

1, Caraway (Siahjira) powder means the powder obtained by grinding the dried mature fruit of Carum Carvi L.
without addition of any other matter. It may be in the form of small pieces of seeds or in finely ground form. It shall
have characteristic flavour and shall be free from extraneous flavour and mustiness. It shall be free from mould,
living and dead insects, insect fragments, rodent contamination. The powder shall be free from added colouring
matter and other harmful substances.

It shall conform to the following standards:—

(i) Moisture

(i) Total ash on dry basis

(iii) Ash insoluble in dilute HCI on dry basis

(iv) VolVolatile oil content on dry basis Black
Blond

2.9.2: Cardamom (Elaichi)

Not more than 12.0 percent by weight
Not more than 8.0 percent by weight
Not more than 1.5 percent by weight
Not less than 2.25 percent by v/w
Not less than 1.33 percent by v/w

1. Cardamom (Chhoti Elaichi) Whole means the dried capsules of nearly ripe fruits of Elettaria cardamomum

L. Maton Var. Minuscula Burkill. The capsules may be light green to brown or pale cream to white when bleached
with sulphur dioxide. It shall have characteristic flavour free from any foreign odour, mustiness or rancidity. It shall
be free from mould, living and dead insects, insect fragments, rodent contamination. Thrip marks alone should not
lead to the conclusion that the capsules have been infested with insects. The product shall be free from added

colouring matter and other harmful substances.
It shall conform to the following standards:
(i) Extraneous matter
(i) Empty and malformed capsules by count
(ii) Immature and shrivelled capsules
(iv) Moisture
(v) Total ash on dry basis
(vi) Volatile oil content on dry basis

(vii) Insect damaged matter

Not more than 1.0 percent by weight
Not more than 3.0 percent by count
Not more than 3.0 percent by weight
Not more than 13.0 percent by weight
Not more than 9.5 percent by weight
Not less than 3.5 percent by v/w

Not more than 1.0 percent by weight

2. Cardamom (Chhoti Elaichi) seeds means the decorticated seeds separated from the dried capsules of nearly
ripe fruits of Elettaria Cardamomum L. Maton var miniscula Burkill. The seeds shall have characteristic flavour free
from foreign odour, mustiness or rancidity. It shall be free from mould, living and dead insects, insect fragments,
rodent contamination. The product shall be free from added colouring matter and any other harmful substances.

It shall conform to the following standards:—
(i) Extraneous matter

(i) Light seeds

(ii) Moisture

(iv) Total ash on dry basis

(v) Volatile oil content on dry basis

(vi) Insect damaged matter

Not more than 2.0 percent by weight
Not more than 3.0 percent by weight
Not more than 13.0 percent by weight
Not more than 9.5 percent by weight
Not less than 3.5 percent by v/w

Not more than 1.0 percent by weight

Explanation :- Light seeds mean seeds that are brown or red in colour and broken immature and shrivelled
seeds.

3. Cardamom (Chhoti Elaichi) powder means the powder obtained by grinding dried seeds of Elettaria
Cardamomum L. Maton var miniscula Burkill without addition of any other substance. It may be in the form of small
pieces of seeds or in finely ground form. It shall have characteristic flavour free from foreign odour, mustiness or
rancidity. It shall be free from mould, living and dead insects, insect fragments, rodent contamination. The powder
shall be free from added colouring matter and other harmful substances.

It shall conform to the following standards:—


[ar Il—ars 4] ART BT UAT : STAT

387

(i) Moisture
(i) Total ash on dry basis
(ii) Ash insoluble in dilute HCI on dry basis.

(iv) Volatile oil content on dry basis

Not more than 11.0 percent by weight
Not more than 8.0 percent by weight
Not more than 3.0 percent by weight
Not less than 3.0 percent by v/w.

4, Large Cardamom (Badi Elaichi) whole means the dried nearly ripe fruit (capsule) of Amomum subulatum
Roxb. The capsule shall have characteristic flavour free from foreign odour, mustiness and rancidity. It shall be free
from mould, living and dead insects, insect fragments, rodent contamination. The product shall be free from added

colouring matter and any harmful substance.
It shall conform to the following standards:—
(i) Extraneous matter
(i) Empty and malformed capsules by count
(ii) Immature and shrivelled capsules
(iv) Moisture
(v) Ash insoluble in dilute HCI on dry basis.
(vi) Total ash on dry basis
(vii) Volatile oil content of seeds on dry basis

(viii) Insect damaged matter

Not more than 1.0 percent by weight
Not more than 2.0 percent by count
Not more than 2.0 percent by weight
Not more than 12.0 percent by weight
Not more than 2.0 percent by weight
Not more than 8.0 percent by weight
Not less than 1.0 percent by v/w.

Not more than 1.0 percent by weight

5. Large Cardamom (Badi Elaichi) seeds means the seeds obtained by decortication of capsules of Amomum
subulatum Roxb. It shall have characteristic flavour free from foreign odour, mustiness and rancidity. It shall be free
from mould, living and dead insects, insect fragments, rodent contamination. The product shall be free from added

colouring matter and other harmful substances.
It shall conform to the following standards:—
(i) Extraneous matter
(i) Light seeds / Brown / Red seeds
(ii) Moisture
(iv) Total ash on dry basis
(v) Ash insoluble in dilute HCI on dry basis.
(vi) Volatile oil content on dry basis

(vii) Insect damaged matter

Not more than 2.0 percent by weight
Not more than 3.0 percent by weight
Not more than 12.0 percent by weight
Not more than 8.0 percent by weight
Not more than 2.0 percent by weight
Not less than 1.0 percent by v/w

Not more than 1.0 percent by weight.

6. Large Cardamom (Badi Elaichi) powder means the powder obtained by grinding seeds of Amomum subulatum
Roxb, without the addition of any other substance. It may be in the form of small pieces of seeds or in finely ground
form. The powder shall have characteristic flavour free from off flavour, mustiness and rancidity. It shall be free from
mould, living and dead insects, insect fragments, rodent contamination. The powder shall be free from added

colouring matter and any harmful substance.
It shall conform to the following standards:—
(i) Moisture
(i) Total ash on dry basis
(ii) Ash insoluble in dilute HCI on dry basis.
(iv) Volatile oil content on dry basis

2.9.3: Chillies and Capsicum (Lal Mirchi)

Not more than 11.0 percent by weight
Not more than 8.0 percent by weight
Not more than 2.0 percent by weight
Not less than 1.0 percent by weight

1. Chillies and Capsicum (Lal Mirchi) whole - means the dried ripe fruits or pods of the Capsicum annum L &
Capsicum frutescens L. The pods shall be free from mould, living and dead insects, insect fragments, rodent
contamination. The product shall be free from extraneous colouring matter, coating of mineral oil and other harmful

substances.


388

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

It shall conform to the following standards:—

(i) Extraneous matter Not more than 1.0 percent by weight
(i) Unripe and marked fruits Not more than 2.0 percent by weight
(ui) Broken fruits, seed & fragments Not more than 5.0 percent by weight
(iv) Moisture Not more than 11.0 percent by weight
(v) Total ash on dry basis Not more than 8.0 percent by weight
(vi) Ash insoluble in dilute HCI on dry basis Not more than 1.3 percent by weight
(vii) Insect damaged matter Not more than 1.0 percent by weight

2. Chillies and Capsicum (Lal Mirchi) powder means the powder obtained by grinding clean ripe fruits or pods
of Capsicum annum L and Capsicum frutescens L. It shall be free from mould, living and dead insects, insect
fragments, rodent contamination. The powder shall be dry, free from dirt, extraneous colouring matter, flavouring
matter, mineral oil and other harmful substances. The chilli powder may contain any edible vegetable oil to a
maximum limit of 2.0 percent by weight under a label declaration for the amount and nature of oil used.

It shall conform to the following standards:—

(i) Moisture Not more than 11.0 percent by weight
(i) Total ash on dry basis Not more than 8.0 percent by weight
(iii) Ash insoluble in dilute HCI on dry basis Not more than 1.3 percent by weight
(iv) Crude fibre Not more than 30.0 percent by weight
(v) Non-volatile ether extract on dry basis Not less than 12.0 percent by weight

2.9.4: Cinnamon (Dalchini)

1, Cimnamon (Dalchini) whole means the inner bark of trunks or branches of Cinnamomum Zeylanicum Blume.
It shall have characteristic odour and flavour and shall be free from foreign flavour and mustiness. It shall be free
from mould, living and dead insects, insect fragments, rodent contamination. The product shall be free from added
colouring matter, foreign vegetable matter and other harmful substances.

It shall conform to the following standards:

(i) Extraneous matter Not more than 1.0 percent by weight
(i) Moisture Not more than 12.0 percent by weight
(ii) Total ash on dry basis Not more than 7.0 percent by weight
(iv) Ash insoluble in dilute HCI on dry basis. Not more than 2.0 percent by weight
(v) Volatile oil content on dry basis Not less than 0.7 percent by v/w

(vi) Insect damaged matter Not more than 1.0 percent by weight

2. Cinnamon (Dalchini) powder means the powder obtained by grinding inner bark of trunk or branches of
Cinnamomum Zeylanicum Blume. The powder shall be yellowish to reddish brown in colour with characteristic
odour and flavour and shall be free from off flavour and mustiness. It shall be free from mould, living and dead
insects, insect fragments, rodent contamination. The product shall be free from added colouring matter, foreign
vegetable matter and other harmful substances.

It shall conform to the following standards:—

(i) Moisture Not more than 12.0 percent by weight
(i) Total ash on dry basis Not more than 7.0 percent by weight
(wi) Ash insoluble in dilute HCI on dry basis. Not more than 2.0 percent by weight

(iv) Volatile oil content on dry basis Not less than 0.5 percent by weight


[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 389

2.9.5: Cassia (Taj)

1, Cassia (Taj) Whole means the bark of trees of Cimamomum Cassia (Nees) ex Blume, Cinnamomum aromaticum
(Nees) Syn, Cinnamomum burmanii (C.G. Nees) blume and Cinnamomum loureini Nees. The product shall have
characteristic odour and flavour and shall be free from off flavour and mustiness. It shall be free from mould, living
and dead insects, insect fragments, rodent contamination. The product shall be free from added colouring matter,
foreign vegetable matter and other harmful substances.

It shall conform to the following standards:—

(i) Extraneous matter Not more than 1.0 percent by weight
(i) Moisture Not more than 12.0 percent by weight
(ii) Total ash on dry basis Not more than 5.0 percent by weight
(iv) Ash insoluble in dilute HCI on dry basis Not more than 1.0 percent by weight
(v) Volatile oil content on dry basis Not less than 2.0 percent by v/w.

2. Cassia (Taj) powder means the powder obtained by grinding bark of trees of Cinnamomum Cassia (Nees) ex
Blume, Cinnamomum aromaticum (Nees) Syn, Cinnamomum burmanii (CG Nees) Blume and Cinnamomum loureini
Nees without addition of any other matter. The powder shall have characteristic odour and flavour and shall be free
from off flavour and mustiness. It shall be free from mould, living and dead insects, insect fragments, rodent
contamination. The powder shall be free from added colouring matter, foreign vegetable matter and other harmful
substances.

It shall conform to the following standards:

(i) Moisture Not more than 12.0 percent by weight
(i) Total ash on dry basis Not more than 5.0 percent by weight
(iii) Ash insoluble in dilute HCI on dry basis Not more than 1.0 percent by v/w

(iv) Volatile oil content on dry basis Not less than 1.5 percent by weight

2.9.6: Cloves (Laung)

1. Cloves (Laung) Whole means the dried unopened flower buds of Eugenia Caryophyllus (C. Sprengel)
Bullock and Harrision. It shall be of a reddish brown to blackish brown colour with a strong aromatic odour free from
off flavour and mustiness. It shall be free from mould, living and dead insects, insect fragments, rodent contamination.
It shall be free from added colouring matter.

It shall conform to the following standards:—

(i) Extraneous matter Not more than 1.0 percent by weight
(i) Tendrils, Mother Cloves Not more than 2.0 percent by weight
(ai) Khokar Cloves Not more than 2.0 percent by weight
(iv) Moisture Not more than 12.0 percent by weight
(v) Volatile oil content on dry basis Not less than 17.0 percent by v/w

(vi) Headless cloves Not more than 2.0 percent by weight
(vii) Insect damaged cloves Not more than 2.0 percent by weight

Explanation: (1) Headless Cloves: A Clove consisting of only the receptacle and sepals and which has lost the
domed shaped head.

(2) Khoker Cloves: A Clove which has undergone fermentation as a result of incomplete drying as evidenced
by its pale brown colour whitish mealy appearance and other wrinkled surface.

(3) Mother Cloves: A fruit in the form of a ovoid brown berry surmounted by four incurved sepals.

2. Cloves (Laung) powder means the powder obtained by grinding the dried unopened flower buds of Eugenia
Caryophyllus (C. Sprengel) Bullock and Harrision without any addition. It shall be of a brown colour with a violet
tinge and shall have a strong spicy aromatic odour free from off flavour and mustiness. It shall be free from mould,
living and dead insects, insect fragments, rodent contamination. It shall be free from added colouring matter.


390 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

It shall conform to the following standards:—
(i) Moisture

(i) Total ash on dry basis

(ii) Ash insoluble in dilute HCI on dry basis.
(iv) Volatile oil content on dry basis

(v) Crude Fibre

Not more than 10.0 percent by weight
Not more than 7.0 percent by weight
Not more than 0.5 percent by weight
Not less than 16.0 percent by v/w
Not more than 13.0 percent by weight

2.9.7: Coriander (Dhania)

1. Coriander (Dhania) whole means the dried mature fruits (seeds) of Coriandrum sativum L. It shall have
characteristic aroma and flavour. It shall be free from mould, living and dead insects, insect fragments, rodent
contamination. The product shall be free from added colouring matter.

It shall conform to the following standards:—
(i) Extraneous matter
(i) Split fruits

Not more than 1.0 percent by weight
Not more than 10.0 percent by weight
(iii) Damaged / Discoloured fruits Not more than 2.0 percent by weight
(iv) Moisture

(v) Volatile oil content on dry basis

(vi) Total ash on dry basis

(vii) Ash insoluble in dilute HCI on dry basis.

(viii) Insect damaged matter

Not more than 9.0 percent by weight
Not less than 0.1 percent by v/w

Not more than 7.0 percent by weight
Not more than 1.5 percent by weight

Not more than 1.0 percent by weight

2. Coriander (Dhania) powder means the powder obtained by grinding clean, sound, dried mature fruits of
Coriandrum sativum L. It shall be in the form of rough or fine powder. It shall have typical aroma and shall be free
from mustiness. It shall be free from mould, living and dead insects, insect fragments, rodent contamination; the
powder shall be free from added colour, starch, bleach or preservative.

It shall conform to the following standards:—
(i) Moisture

(i) Volatile oil content on dry basis

(ii) Total ash on dry basis

(iv) Ash insoluble in dilute HCI on dry basis.

Not more than 9.0 percent by weight
Not less than 0.09 percent by v/w

Not more than 7.0 percent by weight
Not more than 1.5 percent by weight

2.9.8: Cumin (Zeera, Kalonji)

1. Cumin (Safed Zeera) whole means the dried mature fruits of Cumimum Cyminum L. It shall have characteristic
aromatic flavour free from mustiness. It shall be free from mould, living and dead insects, insect fragments, rodent
contamination. The product shall be free from added colour and harmful substances.

It shall conform to the following standards:—
(i) Extraneous matter

(i) Broken fruits (Damaged, shrivelled,
discoloured and immature seed)

(ii) Moisture

(iv) Total ash on dry basis

(v) Ash insoluble in dilute HCI on dry basis.

(vi) Non volatile ether extract on dry basis

(vii) Volatile oil content on dry basis

(viii) Proportion of edible seeds other than cumin seeds

(x) Insect damaged matter

Not more than 3.0 percent by weight
Not more than 5.0 percent by weight

Not more than 10.0 percent by weight
Not more than 9.5 percent by weight
Not more than 3.0 percent by weight
Not less than 15.0 percent by weight
Not less than 1.5 percent by v/w
Absent

Not more than 1.0 percent by weight



[art II—ars 4]

ART AT USI 2 SATS

391

2. Cumin (Safed Zeera) powder means the powder obtained by grinding the dried mature seeds of Cuminum
Cyminum L. It shall have characteristic aromatic flavour free from mustiness. It shall be free from mould, living and
dead insects, insect fragments, rodent contamination. The powder shall be free from added colour and harmful
substances.

It shall conform to the following standards:—
(i) Moisture
(i) Total ash on dry basis

(ii) Acid insoluble ash on dry basis
(iv) Non volatile ether extract on dry basis
(v) Volatile oil content on dry basis

Not more than 10.0 percent by weight
Not more than 9.5 percent by weight
Not more than 1.5 percent by weight
Not less than 15.0 percent by weight
Not less than 1.3 percent by v/w

3. Cumin Black (Kalonji) whole means the seeds of Nigella sativa L. It shall have characteristic aromatic flavour
free from mustiness. It shall be free from mould, living and dead insects, insect fragments, rodent contamination.

The product shall be free from added colour and harmful substances.

It shall conform to the following standards:—

0)
(ii)

Extraneous matter

Broken fruits (Damaged, shrivelled,

discoloured and immature seed)

(tit)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
(vii)
(viii)

(ix)

Moisture

Total ash on dry basis

Ash insoluble in dilute HCI on dry basis
Non volatile ether extract on dry basis
Volatile oil content on dry basis

Edible seeds other than cumin black

Insect damaged matter

Not more than 1.5 percent by weight
Not more than 5.0 percent by weight

Not more than 10.0 percent by weight
Not more than 8.0 percent by weight
Not more than 1.5 percent by weight
Not less than 12.0 percent by weight
Not less than 1.0 percent by v/w

Not more than 2.0 percent by weight

Not more than 1.0 percent by weight

4, Cumin Black (Kalonji) powder means the powder obtained by grinding the dried seeds of Nigella sativa L.
It shall have characteristic aromatic flavour free from mustiness. It shall be free from mould, living and dead insects,
insect fragments, rodent contamination. The powder shall be free from added colour and harmful substances.

It shall conform to the following standards:—
(i) Moisture

(i) Total ash on dry basis

(iii) Ash insoluble in dilute HCI on dry basis
(iv) Volatile oil content on dry basis

(v) Non volatile ether extract on dry basis (ml/100gm)

2.9.9: Fennel (Saunf)

1. Fennel (Saunf) whole means the dried ripe fruit of Foeniculum vulgare P. Miller Var. Vulgare. It shall have
characteristic flavour free from foreign odour, mustiness and rancidity. It shall be free from mould, living and dead
insects, insect fragments, rodent contamination. The product shall be free from added colouring matter and any
harmful substance.

It shall conform to the following standards:—

(i) Extraneous matter

(i) Defective seeds

(ii) Moisture
(iv) Total ash on dry basis
(v) Ash insoluble in dilute HCI on dry basis.

Not more than 10.0 percent by weight
Not more than 7.0 percent by weight
Not more than 1.5 percent by weight
Not less than 0.9 percent by v/w

Not less than 12.0 percent by weight

Not more than 2.0 percent by weight
Not more than 5.0 percent by weight
Not more than 12.0 percent by weight
Not more than 10.0 percent by weight
Not more than 2.0 percent by weight


392 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]
(vi) Volatile oil content on dry basis Not less than 1.0 percent by v/w
(vii) Edible seeds other than fennel Absent
(viii) Insect damaged matter Not more than 1.0 percent by weight

2. Fennel (Saunf) powder means the power obtained by grinding ripe fruits (seeds) of Foeniculum Vulgare P.
Miller Var Vulgare. The powder shall have characteristic aromatic flavour free from off flavour, mustiness and
rancidity. It shall be free from mould, living and dead insects, insect fragments, rodent contamination. The powder
shall be free from added colouring matter and any harmful substance.

It shall conform to the following standards:—

(i) Moisture Not more than 12.0 percent by weight
(i) Total ash on dry basis Not more than 9.0 percent by weight
(wi) Ash insoluble in dilute HCI on dry basis. Not more than 2.0 percent by weight
(iv) Volatile oil content on dry basis Not less than 1.0 percent by v/w

2.9.10: Fenugreek (Methi)

1, Fenugreek (Methi) Whole means the dried mature seeds of Trigonella foenum graecum L. The seeds shall
be free from any off flavour, mustiness and rancidity. It shall be free from mould, living and dead insects, insect
fragments, rodent contamination. The product shall be free from added colour, and other harmful substances.

It shall conform to the following standards:—

(i) Extraneous matter Not more than 2.0 percent by weight
(i) Moisture Not more than 10.0 percent by weight
(ii) Total ash on dry basis Not more than 5.0 percent by weight
(iv) Ash insoluble in dilute HCI on dry basis Not more than 1.5 percent by weight
(v) Cold water soluble extract on dry basis Not less than 30.0 percent by weight
(vii) Edible seeds other than fenugreek Not more than 2.0 percent by weight
(viii) Insect damaged matter Not more than 1.0 percent by weight

2. Fenugreek (Methi) powder means the powder obtained by grinding the dried mature seeds of Trigonella
foenum graecum L. It shall be free from mould, living and dead insects, insect fragments, rodent contamination. The
powder shall be free from added colour and other harmful substances.

It shall conform to the following standards:—

(i) Moisture Not more than 10.0 percent by weight
(i) Total ash on dry basis Not more than 5.0 percent by weight
(ii) Ash insoluble in dilute HCI on dry basis. Not more than 1.5 percent by weight
(iv) Cold water soluble extract on dry basis Not less than 30.0 percent by weight

2.9.11: Ginger (Sonth, Adrak)

1. Ginger (Sonth, Adrak) whole means the dried rhizome of Zingiber officinale Roscoe in pieces irregular in
shape and size, pale brown in colour with peel not entirely removed and washed and dried in sun. It may be bleached
with lime. It shall have characteristic taste and flavour free from musty odour or rancid or bitter taste. It shall be free
from mould, living and dead insects, insect fragments, and rodent contamination. The product shall be free from
added colouring matter.

It shall conform to the following standards:—
(i) Extraneous matter Not more than 1.0 percent by weight
(i) Moisture Not more than 12.0 percent by weight
(ii) Total ash on dry basis

(a) Unbleached Not more than 8.0 percent by weight


[art II—ars 4]

ART AT USI 2 SATS

393

(b) Bleached

(iv) Calcium as Calcium oxide on dry basis
(a) Unbleached
(b) Bleached

(v) Volatile oil content on dry basis

(vi) Insect damaged matter

Not more than 12.0 percent by weight

Not more than 1.1 percent by weight
Not more than 2.5 percent by weight
Not less than 1.5 percent by v/w

Not more than 1.0 percent by weight

2. Ginger (Sonth, Adrak) Powder means the powder obtained by grinding rhizome of Zingiber officinale
Roscoe. It shall have characteristic taste and flavour free from musty odour or rancid or bitter taste. It shall be free
from mould, living and dead insects, insect fragments, and rodent contamination. The powder shall be free from

added colouring matter.
It shall conform to the following standards:—
(i) Moisture
(i) Total ash on dry basis
(a) Unbleached
(b) Bleached
(ai) Calcium as Calcium oxide on dry basis
(a) Unbleached
(b) Bleached
(iv) Volatile oil content on dry basis
(v) Water soluble ash on dry basis
(vi) Acid insoluble ash on dry basis
(vii) Alcohol (90% v/w) soluble extract on dry basis

(viii) Cold water soluble extract on dry basis

2.9.12: Mace (Jaipatri)

Not more than 12.0 percent by weight

Not more than 8.0 percent by weight
Not more than 12.0 percent by weight

Not more than 1.1 percent by weight
Not more than 2.5 percent by weight
Not less than 1.5 percent by v/w
Not less than 1.7 percent by weight
Not more than 1.0 percent by weight
Not less than 5.1 percent by weight

Not less than 11.4 percent by weight

1. Mace (Jaipatri) whole means the dried coat or aril of the seed of Myristica fragrans Houttuyn. It shall not
contain the aril of any other variety of Myristica nalabarica or Fatua (Bombay mace) and Myristica argenea (Wild
mace). It shall have characteristic aromatic flavour free from foreign odour and mustiness. It shall be free from mould,
living and dead insects, insect fragments, rodent contamination. The product shall be free from added colouring

matter.
It shall conform to the following standards:—
(i) Extraneous matter
(i) Moisture
(ii) Total ash on dry basis
(iv) Ash insoluble in dilute HCI on dry basis.
(v) Volatile oil content on dry basis
(vi) Insect damaged matter

(vii) Nutmeg in mace

Not more than 0.5 percent by weight
Not more than 10.0 percent by weight
Not more than 4.0 percent by weight
Not more than 0.5 percent by weight
Not less than 7.5 percent by v/w

Not more than 1.0 percent by weight

Not more than 1.0 percent by weight

2. Mace (Jaipatri) powder means the powder obtained by grinding dried coat or aril of the seed of Myristica
fragrans Houttuyn. It shall have characteristic aromatic flavour free from foreign odour and mustiness. It shall be
free from mould, living and dead insects, insect fragments, rodent contamination. The powder shall be free from

added colouring matter.


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY

[Part III—Sec. 4]

The powder shall conform to the following requirements:—
(i) Moisture

(i) Total ash on dry basis

(iii) Ash insoluble in dilute HCI on dry basis

(iv) Volatile oil content on dry basis

(v) Crude fibre

(vi) Non-volatile ether extract

2.9.13: Mustard (Rai, Sarson)

Not more than 10.0 percent by weight
Not more than 3.0 percent by weight
Not more than 0.5 percent by weight
Not less than 5.0 percent by v/w

Not more than 10.0 percent by weight

Not less than 20.0 and not more than 30.0
percent by weight.

1. Mustard (Rai, Sarson) whole means the dried, clean mature seeds of one or more of the plants of Brassica

alba. (L). Boiss (Safed rai), Brassica compestris L. var, dichotoma (Kali Sarson), Brasssica Compestris, L. Var, yellow
Sarson, Syn, Brassica compestris L, var glauca (Pili Sarson), Brassica, compestris L. Var. toria (Toria), Barassicajuncea,
(L). Coss et Czern (Rai, Lotni) and Brassica nigra (L); Koch (Benarasi rai). It shall be free from mould, living and dead
insects, insect fragments, rodent contamination. The product shall be free from the seeds of Argemone Maxicana L,

any other harmful substances and added colouring matter.
It shall conform to the following standards:
(i) Extraneous matter
(i) Damaged or Shrivelled seeds
(ii) Moisture
(iv) Total ash on dry basis
(v) Ash insoluble in dilute HCl on dry basis
(vi) Non volatile ether extract on dry basis
(vii) Violatile oil content on dry basis
(viii) Insect damaged matter
(ix) Allyl iso thiocyanate (m/m) on dry basis
(a) B nigra
(b) B Juncea

(x) P-hydroxybenzyl iso-thiocyanate (m/m) on dry basis
in sinapist alba

(xi) Argemone seeds

Not more than 2.0 percent by weight
Not more than 2.0 percent by weight
Not more than 10.0 percent by weight
Not more than 6.5 percent by weight
Not more than 1.0 percent by weight
Not less than 28.0 percent by weight
Not less than 0.3 percent by v/w

Not more than 1.0 percent by weight

Not less than 1.0 percent by weight

Not less than 0.7 percent by weight
Not less than 2.3 percent by weight

Absent

2. Mustard (Rai, Sarson) powder means the powder obtained by grinding dried, clean mature seeds of one or

more of the plants of Brassica alba. (L). Boiss (Safed rai), Brassica compestris L. var, dischotoma (Kali Sarson),
Brassica Compestris, L. Var, (yellow Sarson), Syn, Brassica compestris L, var glauca (Pili Sarson), Brassica, compestris
L. Var. toria (Toria), Barassicajuncea, (L). Coss et Czern (Rai, Lotni) and Brassica nigra (L); Koch (Benarasi rai)
without addition of any other matter. It shall have characteristic pungent aromatic flavour free from rancidity and
mustiness. It shall be free from mould, living and dead insects, insect fragments, rodent contamination. The powder
shall be free from Argemone maxicana. L and other harmful substances. It shall also be free from added colouring

matter.
It shall conform to the following standards:
(i) Moisture
(i) Total ash on dry basis
(ii) Ash insoluble in dilute HCI on dry basis.
(iv) Non volatile ether extract on dry basis
(v) Volatile oil content on dry basis
(vi) Crude fibre
(vii) Starch

(viii) Test for argemone oil

Not more than 7.0 percent by weight
Not more than 6.5 percent by weight
Not more than 1.0 percent by weight
Not less than 28.0 percent by weight
Not less than 0.3 percent by v/w

Not more than 8.0 percent by weight
Not more than 2.5 per cent by weight

Negative


[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 395

2.9.14: Nutmeg (Jaiphal)

1. Nutmeg (Jaiphal) whole means the dried seed (kernel) of Myristica fragrans Houttuyn. It shall be of greyish
brown colour but it may be white if it has been subjected to liming. It shall have characteristic aromatic flavour free
from foreign odour and mustiness. It shall be free from mould, living and dead insects, insect fragments, and rodent
contamination. The product shall be free from added colouring matter.

It shall conform to the following standards:—
(i) Extraneous matter

(i) Mace in Nutmeg

(ii) Moisture

(iv) Total ash on dry basis

(v) Water insoluble ash on dry basis

(vi) Ash insoluble in dilute HCI on dry basis.
(vii) Volatile oil content on dry basis

(viii) Calctum content expressed as Calcium Oxide on dry basis

Absent

Not more than 3.0 percent by weight
Not more than 10.0 percent by weight
Not more than 3.0 percent by weight
Not more than 1.5 percent by weight
Not more than 0.5 percent by weight
Not less than 6.5 percent by v/w

Not more than 0.35 percent by weight

2. Nutmeg (Jaiphal) powder means the powder obtained by grinding the dried seeds (kernel) or Myristica

fragrans Houttuyn. It shall have characteristic aromatic flavour free from foreign odour and mustiness. It shall be
free from mould, living and dead insects, insect fragments, rodent contamination. The powder shall be free from
added colouring matter.

It shall conform to the following standards:—
(i) Moisture

(i) Total ash on dry basis

(iii) Water insoluble ash on dry basis

(iv) Ash insoluble in dilute HCI on dry basis
(v) Volatile oil content on dry basis

Not more than 8.0 percent by weight
Not more than 3.0 percent by weight
Not more than 1.5 percent by weight
Not more than 0.5 percent by weight
Not less than 6.0 percent by v/w

(vi) Crude Fibre

(vii) Non volatile ether extract on dry basis

Not more than 10.0 percent by weight

Not less than 25.0 percent by weight

2.9.15: Pepper Black (Kalimirch)

1. Pepper Black (Kalimirch) whole means the dried berries of Piper nigrum L., brown to black in colour with a
wrinkled pericarp. The berries are generally picked before complete ripening and may be brown, grey or black in
colour. It shall be free from mould, living and dead insects, insect fragments, rodent contamination. The product
shall be free from added colour, mineral oil and any other harmful substances.

It shall conform to the following standards:—
(i) Extraneous matter

(i) Light Berries

(iii) Pinheads or broken berries

(iv) Bulk Density (gm/litre)

(v) Moisture

(vi) Total ash on dry basis

(vii) Non volatile ether extract on dry basis
(viii) Volatile oil content on dry basis

(ix) Peperine Content on dry basis

(x) Insect damaged matter (percent by weight)

Not more than 1.0 percent by weight
Not more than 5.0 percent by weight
Not more than 4.0 percent by weight
Not less than 490 gm/litre by weight
Not more than 13.0 percent by weight
Not more than 6.0 percent by weight
Not less than 6.0 percent by weight
Not less than 2.0 percent by v/w

Not less than 4.0 percent by weight

Not more than 1.0 percent by weight


396 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

Explanation:—

(a) Light Berry means berry that has reached an apparently normal stage of development but the

kernel does not exist.

(b) Pinhead means berry of very small size that has not developed.

(c) Broken berry means berry that has been separated in two or more parts.

2. Pepper Black (Kali Mirch) powder means the powder obtained by grinding dried berries of Piper nigrum L
without addition to any other matter. It shall have characteristic aromatic flavour free from foreign odour, mustiness
or rancidity. It shall be free from mould, living and dead insects, insect fragments, rodent contamination. The powder
shall be free from added colouring matter, mineral oil and any other harmful substances.

It shall conform to the following standards:—
(i) Moisture

(i) Total ash on dry basis

(iii) Ash insoluble in dilute HCI on dry basis
(iv) Crude Fibre on dry basis

(v) Non volatile ether extract on dry basis

(vi) Volatile oil content on dry basis

Not more than 12.5 percent by weight
Not more than 6.0 percent by weight
Not more than 1.2 percent by weight
Not more than 17.5 percent by weight
Not less than 6.0 percent by weight
Not less than 1.75 percent by v/w

(vii) Peperine Content on dry basis Not less than 4.0 percent by weight

3, Light Black Pepper means the dried berries of Piper nigrum L. dark brown to dark black in colour. It shall be
well dried and free from mould, living and dead insects, insect fragments, rodent contamination.

It shall conform to the following standards:—
(i) Extraneous matter

(i) Other Foreign edible seeds

Not more than 1.0 percent by weight
Not more than 2.0 percent by weight

4, Pinheads shall be wholly derived from the spikes of piper nigrum L. They shall be reasonably dry and free
from insects. The colour shall be from dark brown to black. It shall be free from added colouring matter.

It shall conform to the following standards:—

Extraneous matter Not more than 1.0 percent by weight

2.9.16: Poppy (Khas Khas)

1. Poppy (Khas Khas) whole means the dried mature seeds of Papaver somniferum L. It may be white or
greyish in colour with characteristic flavour free from off flavour, mustiness and rancidity. It shall be free from mould,
living and dead insects, insect fragments, rodent contamination. The product shall be free from added colouring
matter and any other harmful substances.

It shall conform to the following standards:—

(i) Extraneous matter Not more than 2.0 percent by weight
(i) Moisture Not more than 11.0 percent by weight

(ai) Non volatile ether extract on dry basis Not less than 40.0 percent by weight

2.9.17: Saffron (Kesar)

1. Saffron (Kesar) means the dried stigmas or tops of styles of Crocus Sativus Linnaeus. It shall be dark red in
colour with a slightly bitter and pungent flavour, free from foreign odour and mustiness. It shall be free from mould,
living and dead insects, insect fragments, rodent contamination. The product shall be free from added colouring
matter.

It shall conform to the following standards:—

(i) Extraneous matter
(i) Floral waste

(ii) Moisture and volatile matter at 103 +°C

Not more than 1.0 percent by weight
Not more than 10.0 percent by weight
Not more than 12.0 percent by weight


[art II—avys 4] FRA AT USTIA + STH

397

(iv) Total ash on dry basis
(v) Ash insoluble in dilute HCI on dry basis
(vi) Solubility in cold water on dry weight Basis

(vii) Bitterness expressed as direct reading of absorbance
of picrocrocine at about 257 nm on dry basis

(viii) Safranal expressed as direct reading of absorbance
of 330 nm on dry basis

Colouring strength expressed as direct reading of
absorbance of 440 nm on dry basis

(x) Total Nitrogen on dry basis
(xi) Crude Fibre on dry basis

(ix

Sa"

Not more than 8.0 percent by weight
Not more than 1.5 percent by weight
Not less than 65.0 percent by weight
Not less than 30.0 percent by weight

Not less than 20.0 percent by weight and
not more than 50.0 percent by weight

Not less than 80.0 percent by weight

Not more than 2.0 percent by weight

Not more than 6.0 percent by weight

Explanation:- Floral waste means yellow filaments that are unattached and separated pollens, stamens, parts

of ovaries and other parts of flowers of Crocus sativus Linnaeus.

2. Saffron (Kesar) powder means the powder obtained by crushing dried stigmas of Crocus Sativus Linnaeus.
It shall be dark red in colour with a slightly bitter and pungent flavour, free from foreign odour and mustiness.

It shall be free from mould, living and dead insects, insect fragments, rodent contamination. The powder shall

be free from added colouring matter.
It shall conform to the following standards:—
(i) Moisture and volatile matter
(i) Total ash on dry basis
(ii) Acid insoluble ash on dry basis
(iv) Solubility in cold water on dry weight basis

(v) Bitterness expressed as direct reading of absorbance
of picrocrocine at about 257 nm on Dry basis

a

(vi) Safranal expressed as direct reading of absorbance
of 330 nm on dry basis

(vii) Colouring strength expressed as direct reading of
absorbance of 440 nm on dry basis

(viii) Total Nitrogen on dry basis
(ix) Crude Fibre on dry basis

2.9.18: Turmeric (Haldi)

Not more than 10.0 percent by weight
Not more than 8.0 percent by weight
Not more than 1.5 percent by weight
Not more than 65.0 percent by weight
Not less than 30.0 percent by weight

Not less than 20.0 percent by weight and
not more than 50.0 percent by weight

Not less than 80.0 percent by weight

Not more than 3.0 percent by weight

Not more than 6.0 percent by weight

1. Turmeric (Haldi) whole means the primary or secondary rhizomes commercially called bulbs or fingers of
Curcuma Longa L. The rhizomes shall be cured by soaking them in boiling water and then drying them to avoid
regeneration. The rhizome be in natural state or machine polished. The product shall have characteristic odour and
flavour and shall be free from mustiness or other foreign flavours. It shall be free from mould, living and dead
insects, insect fragments, rodent contamination. The product shall be free from Lead Chromate added starch and

any other extraneous colouring matter.
It shall conform to the following standards:—
(i) Extraneous matter
(i) Defective Rhizomes
(ii) Moisture
(iv) Insect damaged matter
(v) Test for lead chromate

Not more than 1.0 percent by weight
Not more than 5.0 percent by weight
Not more than 12.0 percent by weight
Not more than 1.0 percent by weight
Negative

Explanation :- Defective rhizomes consist of shrivelled fingers and or bulbs internally damaged, hollow or
porous rhizomes scorched by boiling and other types of damaged rhizomes.


398

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

2. Turmeric (Haldi) powder means the powder obtained by grinding dried rhizomes or bulbous roots of
Curcuma Longa L. The powder shall have characteristic odour and flavour and shall be free from mustiness or other
foreign odour. It shall be free from mould, living and dead insects, insect fragments, rodent contamination. The
powder shall be free from any added colouring matter including Lead Chromate and morphologically extraneous
matter including foreign starch.

It shall conform to the following standards:—

(i) Moisture Not more than 10.0 percent by weight

(i) Total ash on dry basis Not more than 9.0 percent by weight

(ii) Ash insoluble in dil. HCl on dry basis Not more than 1.5 percent by weight

(iv) Colouring power expressed as Not less than 2.0 percent by weight
curcuminoid content on dry basis

(v) Total Starch Not more than 60.0 percent by weight

(vi) Test for lead chromate Negative

2.9.19: CURRY POWDER

1. CURRY POWDER means the powder obtained from grinding clean, dried and sound spices belonging to the
group of aromatic herbs and seeds such as black pepper, cinnamon, cloves, coriander, cardamom, chillies, cumin
seeds, fenugreek, garlic, ginger, mustard, poppy seeds, turmeric, mace, nutmeg, curry leaves, white pepper, saffron
and aniseeds. The material may contain added starch and edible common salt. The proportion of spices used in the
preparation of curry powder shall be not less than 85.0 per cent by weight. The powder shall be free from dirt, mould
growth and insect infestation. It shall be free from any added colouring matter and preservatives other than edible
common salt.

The curry powder shall also conform to the following standards:—

Moisture Not more than 14.0 percent by weight

Volatile oil Not less than 0.25 percent (v/w) on dry basis
Non-volatile ether extract Not less than 7.5 per cent by weight on dry basis.
Edible common salt Not more than 5.0 per cent by weight on dry basis
Ash insoluble in dilute HC] Not more than 2.0 per cent by weight on dry basis.
Crude Fibre Not more than 15.0 percent by weight on dry basis
Lead Not more than 10.0 p.p.m on dry basis

2.9.20: MIXED MASALA

1. MIXED MASALA (WHOLE) means a mixture of clean, dried and sound aromatic herbs and spices. It may
also contain dried vegetables and/or fruits, oilseeds, garlic, ginger, poppy seeds and curry leaves. It shall be free
from added colouring matter. It shall be free from mould growth and insect infestation. The proportion of extraneous
matter shall not exceed five per cent by weight, out of which the proportion of organic matter including foreign
edible seeds and inorganic matter shall not exceed three per cent and two per cent respectively.

2.9.21: Aniseed (Saunf)

1. Aniseed (Saunf) whole means the dried and mature fruit of Pimpinella anisum L. It shall have characteristic
aromatic flavour and shall be free from mustiness. It shall be free from mould, living and dead insects, insect
fragments, rodent contamination. The product shall be free from added colouring matter and harmful substances.

It shall conform to the following standards:—

(i) Extraneous matter Not more than 2.0 percent by weight
(i) Shrivelled, immature, damaged / insect damaged / Not more than 5.0 percent by weight
broken fruit

(ii) Moisture Not more than 12.0 percent by weight


[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 399

(iv) Total ash on dry basis Not more than 9.0 percent by weight
(v) Ash insoluble in dilute HCl on dry basis Not more than 1.5 percent by weight
(vi) Volatile oil content on dry basis Not less than 1.0 percent by v/w

(vii) Insect damaged matter Not more than 1.0 percent by weight
(viii) Foreign edible seeds Not more than 2.0 percent by weight

2.9.22: Ajowan (Bishops seed)

1. Ajowan (Bishops seed) means the dried ripe fruits (seeds) of Trachyspermum ammi. L Sprague. It shall have
characteristic aromatic flavour and shall be free from mustiness. It shall be free from mould, living and dead insects,
insect fragments, rodent contamination. The product shall be free from added colouring matter and any other
harmful substances.

It shall conform to the following standards:—

(i) Moisture Not more than 11.0 percent by weight
(i) Extraneous matter Not more than 2.0 percent by weight
(ii) Shrivelled / Damaged / insect damaged / broken fruit Not more than 2.0 percent by weight
(iV) Volatile oil content on dry basis Not less than 1.5 percent v/w

2.9.23: Dried Mango Slices

1. Dried Mango Slices--Means the dried wholesome, edible part of raw mango fruit with or without the outer
skin. It shall be free from fungus, moulds and insect infestation, rodent contamination, added colouring, flavouring
matter. It shall also be free from deleterious substances injurious to health. It shall not contain any preservative
except edible common salt which may be added to the extent of 5 per cent by weight on dry basis. It shall have
characteristic taste and flavour. The proportion of extraneous substance shall not exceed 4 per cent by weight out
of which inorganic matter shall not exceed 2 per cent by weight.

It shall also conform to the following standards, namely :—

Moisture Not more than 12 per cent by weight.
Damaged slices Not more than 5 per cent by weight.
Seed Coatings Not more than 6 per cent by weight.
Explanation:

(i) Seed coatings shall be exterior covering of the seed.

(ii) Damaged slices mean the slices that are eaten by weevils or other insects and includes slices
internally damaged by fungus, moisture or heating.

2.9.24 Dried Mango Powder (Amchur)

1. Dried Mango Powder (Amchur)--Means the powder obtained by grinding clean and dried mango slices
having characteristic taste and flavour. It shall be free from musty odour and objectionable flavour, rodent
contamination, mould, fungus and insect infestation, extraneous matter and added colouring, flavouring matter. It
shall also be free from deleterious substances injurious to health. It shall not contain any preservative except edible
common salt which may be added to the extent of 5 per cent by weight on dry basis.

It shall also conform to the following standards, namely:—

(a) Moisture Not more than 12 per cent by Weight

(b) Total ash (salt free basis) Not more than 6 per cent by weight

(c) Ashinsoluble in dilute HCl Not more than 1.5 per cent by weight

(d) Crude fibre Not more than 6 per cent by weight

(e) Acidity as anhydrous tartaric acid Not less than 12 per cent and not more than

26 percent by weight


400

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

2.9.25: Pepper White

1. Pepper White whole means the dried berries of Piper nigrum L. from which the outer pericap is removed
with or without preliminary soaking in water and subsequent drying, if necessary. The berries shall be light brown
to white in colour with a smooth surface. The berries on grinding shall have characteristic aromatic flavour and shall
be free from mustiness. It shall be free from mould, living and dead insects, insect fragments, rodent contamination.
The product shall be free from added colouring matter and any other harmful substances.

It shall conform to the following standards:—

(i) Extraneous matter Not more than 0.8 percent by weight
(i) Broken Berries Not more than 3.0 percent by weight
(ai) Black berries Not more than 5.0 percent by weight
(iv) Bulk Density (gm/litre) Not less than 600 percent by weight
(v) Moisture Not more than 13.0 percent by weight
(vi) Total ash on dry basis Not more than 3.5 percent by weight
(vii) Non Volatile ether extract on dry basis Not less than 6.5 percent by weight
(viii) Volatile oil content on dry basis Not less than 1.0 percent by v/w

(ix) Peperine Content on dry basis Not less than 4.0 percent by weight
(x) Insect damaged matter Not more than 1.0 percent by weight

Explanation:- (a) Broken berries means berry that has been separated in two or more parts.

(b) Black Berry means berry of dark colour generally consisting of black pepper berry whose pericarp has not
been fully removed.

2. Pepper White powder means the powder obtained by grinding dried berries of Piper nigrum L. from which
the outer pericarp is removed and to which no foreign matter is added. It shall have characteristic aromatic flavour
and shall be free from mustiness. It shall be free from mould, living and dead insects, insect fragments, rodent
contamination. The powder shall be free from added colouring matter and any other harmful substances.

It shall conform to the following standards:—

(i) Moisture Not more than 13.0 percent by weight
(i) Total ash on dry basis Not more than 3.5 percent by weight
(iii) Ash insoluble in dilute HCI on dry basis Not more than 0.3 percent by weight
(iv) Crude fibre on dry basis Not more than 6.5 percent by weight
(v) Non Volatile ether extract on dry basis Not less than 6.5 percent by weight
(vi) Volatile oil content on dry basis Not less than 0.7 percent by v/w

(vii) Peperine Content on dry basis Not less than 4.0 percent by weight

2.9.26: Garlic (Lahsun)

1, Dried (Dehydrated) Garlic (Lahsun) means the product obtained by drying by any suitable method which
ensures characteristics of fresh garlic on rehydration the cloves of Allium sativum L. without bleaching or precooking.
It shall be white to pale cream in colour, free from scorched, toasted and baked particles. It may be whole, sliced,
quarters, pieces, flakes, kibbled, granules or powdered. The product on rehydration shall have characteristic pungent
of odour of garlic, free from off odour, mustiness fermentation and rancidity. It shall be free from mould, living and
dead insects, insect fragments, rodent contamination and fungal infection. The products shall be free from added
colouring matter and any other harmful substances. It shall be free from stalks, peels, stems, and extraneous matter.
When in powdered form, it shall be free flowing and free from agglomerates.


[art II—ars 4]

ART AT USI 2 SATS

401

The products may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix - A and it shall

conform to the following standards, namely:—
(i) Extraneous matter
(i) Moisture
a. In case of powdered Garlic
b. other than powdered Garlic
(ii) Total ash on dry basis
(iv) Ash insoluble in dil HCl
(v) Cold water soluble extract on dry basis

(vi) Volatile organic sulphur compound on dry basis

(vii) Peroxidase test

2.9.27: Celery

Not more than 0.5 percent

Not more than 5.0 percent by weight
Not more than 8.0 percent by weight
Not more than 5.0 percent by dry weight
Not more than 0.5 percent by weight

Not less than 70.0 and not more than 90.0
percent by weight

Not less than 0.3 percent by weight

Negative

1. Celery whole means the dried ripe fruits (seeds) of Apium graveoleans L. It shall be of uniform colour with
characteristic aromatic flavour and shall be free from mustiness. It shall be free from mould, living and dead insects,
insect fragments, rodent contamination. The product shall be free from added colouring matter and any other

harmful substances.
It shall conform to the following standards:—
(i) Extraneous matter

(i) Moisture

2.9.28: Dehydrated Onion (Sukha Pyaj)

Not more than 2.0 percent by weight
Not more than 10.0 percent by weight

1. Dehydrated Onion (Sukha Pyaj) - means the product obtained by removal of most moisture by any acceptable
method which ensures characteristics of fresh onions on rehyderation, from sound bulbs of Allium cepa.L. free from
mould, disease, outer skin, leaves and roots. The product may be whole or in the form of slices, rings, flakes, pieces,
small grits or powder. The product may be white/cream/pink or red in colour, free from stalks, peals, stems and
extraneous matters and scorched particles. The finished product shall be free from discolouration or enzymatic
reaction. The product on rehyderation shall be of characteristic flavour, free from foreign and off flavour, mustiness,
fermentation and rancid flavour.

It shall be free from mould, living and dead insects, insect fragments and rodent contamination. The product
shall be free from added colouring matter and any other harmful substances. When in powdered form, it shall be free
flowing and free from agglomerates.

The products may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix - A and it shall
conform to the following standards, namely:—

Extraneous matter

Moisture:

(a) In case of powdered onion
(b) Other than powdered onion
Total Ash on dry basis

Ash insoluble in dil HCI

Peroxidase

2.9.29 Asafoetida

Not more than 0.5 percent by weight

Not more than 5.0 percent by weight
Not more than 8.0 percent by weight
Not more than 5.0 percent by weight
Not more than 0.5 percent by weight

Negative

ASAFOETIDA (Hing or Hingra) means the oleogumresin obtained from the rhizome and roots of Ferula
alliaces, Ferula rubricaulis and other species of Ferula. It shall not contain any colophony resin, galbonum resin,
ammoniaccum resin or any other foreign resin. Hing shall conform to the following standards, namely:


402

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

(1) Total ash content shall not exceed 15 per cent by weight.
(2) Ash insoluble in dilute hydrochloric acid shall not exceed 2.5 per cent by weight.

(3) The alcoholic extract (with 90 per cent alcohol) shall not be less than 12 per cent as estimated by the
U.S.P. 1936 method.

(4) Starch shall not exceed 1 per cent by weight.
Hingra shall conform to the following standards namely:—
(1) The total ash content shall not exceed 20 per cent by weight.
(2) Ash insoluble in dilute hydrochloric acid shall not exceed 8 per cent by weight.

(3) The alcoholic extract (with 90 per cent alcohol) shall not be less than 50 per cent as estimated by the
U.S.P. 1936 method.

(4) Starch shall not exceed 1 per cent by weight.

Compounded asafoetida or Bandhani Hing is composed of one or more varieties of asafoetida (Irani or
Pathani Hing or both) and gum arabic, edible starches or edible cereal flour.

It shall not contain:—
(a) colophony resin,
(b) galbanum resin,
(c) ammoniaccum resin,
(d) any other foreign resin,
(e) coal tar dyes,
(f) mineral pigment,
(g) more than 10 per cent total ash content,
(h) more than 1.5 per cent ash insoluble in dilute hydrochloric acid,

(i) less than 5 per cent alcoholic extract, (with 90 per cent of alcohol) as estimated by the U.S.P. 1936
method.

2.9.30 EDIBLE COMMON SALT:

1, EDIBLE COMMON SALT means a crystalline solid, white, pale, pink or light grey in colour free from
contamination with clay, grit and other extraneous adulterant and impurities. It shall not contain moisture in excess
of six per cent of the weight of the undried sample. The sodium chloride content (as NaCl) and matter soluble in
water other than sodium chloride on dry weight basis shall be as specified in columns (2) and (3) of the Table below
against the period of validity mentioned in the corresponding entry in column (1) of the said Table. The matter
insoluble in water shall not exceed 1.0 per cent by weight on dry weight basis.

Period of Validity Minimum percentageof Maximum Percentageof matter
sodium chloridecontent solublein water other than

as NaCl(on dry basis) sodium chloride (on dry basis)

Upto 3 1-3-1982 94.0 5.0

From 1-4-1982 to 31-3-1983 94.5 45

From 1-4-1983 to 31-3-1984 95.0 40

From 1-4-1984 to 31-3-1985 95.5 3.5

From 1-4-1985 onwards 96.0 3.0

The product may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. The total matter
insoluble in water where an anticaking agent has been added shall not exceed 2.2 percent and sodium chloride
content on dry basis shall not be less than 97.0 percent by weight.


[art II—ars 4]

FRA AT USTIA + STH 403

2. IODISED SALT means a crystalline salt, white or pale, pink or light grey in colour, free from contamination

Moisture

Sodium Chloride (NaCl)

Matter insoluble in water

with clay, grit and other extraneous adulterants and impurities. It shall conform to the following standards, namely:—

Not more than 6.0 per cent by weight of the undried
sample.

Not less than 96.0 per cent by weight on dry basis.
Not more than 1.0 per cent by weight on dry basis

Matter soluble in water Other than Sodium Chloride Not more than 3.0 per cent by weight on dry basis

Iodine content at—
(a) Manufacture level

(b) Distribution channel including retail level

Not less than 30 parts per million on dry weight basis
Not less than 15 part per million on dry weight basis.

The product may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. The total matter
insoluble in water where an anticaking agent has been added shall not exceed 2.2 percent and sodium chloride
content on dry basis shall not be less than 97.0 percent by weight.

3, IRON FORTIFIED COMMON SALT means a crystalline solid, white or pale, pink or light grey in colour, free
from visible contamination with clay and other extraneous adulterants and impurities. It shall conform to the

following standards namely:—

Moisture

Water insoluble matter
weight basis.

Chloride content as Nacl
Matter insoluble in dilute HCl

Matter soluble in water other than Nacl

Iron content (as Fe)

Phosphorous as Inorganic (PO4 )

Sulphate as (SO4)

Magnesium as (Mg) water soluble

pH value in 5% aqueous Solution

Not more than 5.0 per cent by weight
Not more than 1.0% on dry

Not less than 96.5% by weight on dry weight basis

Not more than 3.0 % by weight on dry weight basis, (to
be determined by the method specified in IS 253-1970).

Not more than 2.5% on dry weight weight basis
850-1100 parts per million.
1500-2000 parts per million

Not more than 1.1% by weight.
Not more than 0.10% by weight
2 to3.5

The product may contain food additives permitted in these regulations including Appendix A. The total matter
insoluble in water where an anticaking agent has been added shall not exceed 2.2 percent on dry weight basis.

4. POTASSIUM IODATE means a crystalline powder, white in colour free from impurities. It shall confirm to
the following standards namely:—

oC PFN DM FF YN

mM ow
m= S&S

Potassium Iodate (as KIO3) percent by weight Not less than

Solubility
Iodine (as I) per cent by wt. not more than

Sulphate (as SO4) per cent by wt. not more than

Bromate, bromide, chlorate & chloride percent by wt. not more than

Matter insoluble in water percent by wt. not more than
Loss on drying percent by wt. not more than

PH (5 percent solution)

Heavy metal (as Pb) ppm not more than

Arsenic (as As) ppm not more than

Iron (as Fe) ppm not more than

99.0
Soluble in '30 Parts of water
0.002
0.02
0.01
0.10

0.1
Neutral
10

3

10


404

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

5. Iron Fortified Iodized Salt (double fortified salt) means a crushed Crystalline Solid; white or pale or pink pr
light grey in colour, free from contamination with clay and other extraneous adulterants and impurities. Salt used for
manufacture of double fortified salt shall have minimum 99.0 percent sodium chloride content on dry weight basis
and moisture not more than 1.5 percent and it shall conform to the following standards namely:—

Moisture Not more than 1.5 per cent by weight
Water insoluble matter Not more than 1.0% on dry weight basis.
Chloride content (as NaCl) Not less than 97.0% on dry weight basis
Matter insoluble in dilute HCl Not more than 0.30 % on dry weight basis
Matter soluble in water other than Nacl Not more than 2.5% on dry weight basis
Iron content (as Fe) 850-1100 parts per million.

Iodine content:

a. Manufacturers level Not less than 30 ppm

b. Distribution Channel including Retail level Not less than 15 ppm

Phosphorous as P,O; 2800-3100 parts per million

Sulphate as (SO4) Not more than 1.1% by weight.
Magnesium as (Mg) water soluble Not more than 0.10% by weight

pH value in 5% aqueous Solution 3.5to5.5

Provided that double fortified salt may contain Sodium Hexametaphosphate (food grade) as stabilizer at
concentration of not more than 1.0 percent on dry weight basis.

: BEVERAGES, (Other than Dairy and Fruits & Vegetables based)

2.10.1: TEA

1. TEA means tea other than Kangra tea obtained by acceptable processes, exclusively from the leaves, buds
and tender stems of plant of the Camellia sinensis (L) O. Kuntze. It may be in the form of black or oolong tea. The
product shall have characteristic flavour free from any off odour, taint and mustiness. It shall be free from living
insects, moulds, dead insects, insect fragments and rodent contamination visible to the naked eye (corrected if
necessary for abnormal vision). The product shall be free from extraneous matter, added colouring matter and
harmful substances:

Provided that the tea may contain "natural flavours" and "natural flavouring substances" which are flavour
preparations and single substance respectively, acceptable for human consumption, obtained exclusively by physical
processes from materials of plants origin either in their natural state or after processing for human consumption in
packaged tea only. Tea containing added flavour shall bear proper label declaration as provided in regulation 2.4.5
(23) of Food Safety and Standards (Packaging and Labeling) Regulations, 2011. Tea used in the manufacture of
flavoured tea shall conform to the standards of tea. The flavoured tea manufacturers shall register themselves with
the Tea Board before marketing flavoured tea. Pectinase enzyme can be added up to a level of 0.2% during manufacture
as processing aid. The product shall conform to the following requirement in which all the figures given are
expressed on the basis of the material oven-dried at 10342° C.

(a) Total Ash (m/m) Not less than 4.0 percent and not more than 8.0
percent
(b) Water Soluble Ash Not less than 45.0 percent of total ash
(c) Alkalinity of water soluble ash expressed Not less than 1.0 percent and not more than 3.0
as KOH (m/m) percent
(d) Acid-insoluble ash (m/m) Not more than 1.0 percent
(e) Water extract (m/m) Not less than 32.0 percent
(f) Crude Fibre (m/m) Not more than 16.5 percent



[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 405

2. KANGRA TEA means tea derived exclusively from the leaves, buds and tender stems of plants of the
Camellia sinensis or Camellia tea grown in Kangra and Mandi valleys of Himachal Pradesh. It shall conform to the
following specifications namely;

(a) Total ash determined on tea dried to constant 4.5 to 9.0 percent by weight

weight at 100°C
(b) Total ash soluble in boiling distilled water Not less than 34 percent of total ash
(c) Ash insoluble in dilute hydrochloric acid Not more than 1.2 percent by weight on dry basis.
(d) Extract obtained by boiling dried tea Not less than 23 percent.
(dried to constant weight at 100°C)
with 100 parts of distilled water for
one hour under reflux
(e) Alkalinity of soluble ash expressed as Not less than 1.0 percent and not more than 2.2
K,0O on dry basis percent
(f) Crude fibre determined on tea dried to Not more than 18.5 percent

constant weight at 100°C
It shall not contain any added colouring matter It may also contain 0.2 per cent Pectinase enzyme

Provided that tea may contain Natural Flavours and Natural Flavouring Substances which are flavour
preparations and single substance respectively, acceptable for human consumption, obtained exclusivley by physical
process from materials of plant origin either in their raw state or after processing for human consumption:

Provided further that such tea containing added flavour shall bear proper label declaration as provided in
regulation 2.4.5 (23) of Food Safety and Standards (Packaging and Labeling) Regulations, 2011.

Provided also that tea used in the manufacture of flavoured tea shall conform to the standards of tea.

Provided that if tea is sold or offered for sale without any indication as to whether it is Kangra tea or not, the
standards or quality of tea prescribed in item regulation 2.10.1 (1) shall apply.

Provided also that Flavoured tea manufacturers shall register themselves with the Tea Board before marketing
Flavoured tea;

3. Green Tea means the product derived solely and exclusively, and produced by acceptable processes,
notably enzyme, inactivation, rolling or comminution and drying, from the leaves, buds and tender stems of varieties
of the species Camellia sinensis (L) O. Kuntze, known to be suitable for making tea for consumption as a beverage.
The product shall have characteristic flavour free from any off odour, taint and mustiness. It shall be free from living
or dead insects, moulds, insect fragments and rodent contamination visible to the naked eye (corrected if necessary
for abnormal vision). The product shall be free from extraneous matter, added colouring matter and harmful substances;

Provided that the tea may contain "natural flavours" and "natural flavouring substances" which are flavour
preparations and single substance respectively, acceptable for human consumption, obtained exclusively by physical
processes from material of plants origin either in their natural state or after processing for human consumption in
packaged tea only. Tea containing added flavour shall bear proper label declaration as provided in regulation 2.4.5
(23) of Food Safety and Standards (Packaging and Labeling) Regulations, 2011. Tea used in the manufacture of
flavoured tea shall conform to the standards of tea. The flavoured tea manufacturers shall register themselves with
the Tea Board before marketing flavoured tea. The product shall conform to the following requirements in which all
the figures given are expressed on the basis of the material oven-dried at 103+2° C.

Parameter Limits
(a) Total Ash (m/m) Not less than 4.0 percent and not more than 8.0
percent
(b) Water-soluble ash Not less than 45.0 percent of total ash.

(c) Alkalinity of water - soluble

Ash expressed as KOH (m/m) Not less than 1.0 percent of total ash and not more
than 3.0 percent


406 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

(d) Acid-insoluble ash (m/m) Not more than 1.0 percent
(e) Water-extract (m/m) Not less than 32.0 percent
(f) Crude fibre (m/m) Not more than 16.5 percent
(g) Total catechins (m/m) Not less than 9.0 percent and not more than 19.0
percent
2.10.2: COFFEE

1. Coffee (green raw or unroasted) means the dried seeds of Coffea arabica, Coffea liberica, Coffee excelsa or
Coffea canephora (robusta) with their husks (mesocarp and endocarp) removed.

1.1 Roasted coffee means properly cleaned green coffee which has been roasted to a brown colour and has
developed its characteristic aroma.

1.2. Ground coffee means the powdered products obtained from ‘roasted coffee' only and shall be free from
husk.

1.3. Coffee (green raw or unroasted), ‘roasted and ground coffee' shall be free from any artificial colouring,
flavouring, facing extraneous matter or glazing substance and shall be in sound, dry and fresh condition, free from
rancid or obnoxious flavour.

1.4. Roasted coffee and ground coffee shall conform to the following analytical standards:-

Moisture (on dry basis) m/m Not more than 5.0 percent

Total Ash (on dry basis) m/m 3.0 to 6.0 percent

Acid insoluble ash (on dry basis) m/m Not more than 0.1 percent

Water soluble ash (on dry basis) m/m Not less than 65 percent of total ash

Alkainity of soluble ash in milliliters of Not less than 3.5 ml & Not more than 5.0 ml

0.1 N hydrochloric acid per gram of material

(on dry basis) m/m

Aqueous extracts on dry basis m/m Not less than 26.0 and not more than 35.0 percent
Caffeine (anhydrous)(on dry basis) m/m Not less than 1.0 percent

2. Soluble Coffee Powder means coffee powder, obtained from freshly roasted and ground pure coffee beans.
The product shall be in the form of a free flowing powder or shall be in the agglomerated form (granules) having
colour, taste and flavour characteristic of coffee. It shall be free from impurities and shall not contain chicory or any
other added substances.

It shall conform to the following standards:

(i) Moisture (on dry basis) m/m Not more than 4.0 percent
(i) Total ash (on dry basis) m/m Not more than 12.0 percent
(ii) Caffeined content (on dry basis) m/m Not less than 2.8 percent
(iv) Solubility in boiling water Dissolves readily in 30 seconds with moderate
stirring
(v) Solubilty in cold water at 16+2°C Soluble with moderate stirring in 3 minutes

2.10.3: CHICORY

1. Chicory means the roasted chicory powder obtained by roasting and grinding of the cleaned and dried
roots of chicorium intybus Lin with or without the addition of edible fats and oils or sugar, like glucose or sucrose
in proportion not exceeding 2.0 percent by weight in aggregate. It shall be free from dirt, extraneous matter, artificial
colouring and flavouring agents.

It shall conform to the following standards, namely:—


[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 407

(i) Total ash (on dry basis) m/m Not less than 3.5 percent and Not more than 8.0
percent
(i) Acid insoluble ash (on dry basis) m/m Not more than 2.5 percent
in diluted Hcl
(iii) Aqueous extracts (on dry basis) m/m Not less than 55.0 percent

2.10.4: COFFEE - CHICORY MIXTURE

1. Coffee - Chicory Mixture means the product prepared by mixing roasted and ground coffee and roasted and
ground chicory and shall be in a sound, dry and dust free condition with no rancid or obnoxious flavour. It shall be
in the form of a free flowing powder having the colour, taste and flavour characteristic of coffee - chicory powder. It
shall be free from any impurities and shall not contain any other added substance. The coffee content in the mixture
shall not be less than 51 per cent by mass. The percentage of coffee and chicory used shall be marked on the label
as provided in Regulation 2.4.5 (1) (i) of Food Safety and Standards (Packaging and Labeling) Regulations, 2011.

It shall conform to the following standards, namely:—

(i) Moisture Not more than 5.0 per cent.
(i) Total ash on dry basis Not more than 7.50 per cent.
(ii) Acid insoluble ash on dry basis Not more than 0.6 per cent.
(iv) Caffeine content on dry basis Not less than 0.6 per cent.
(v) Aqueous extracts Not more than 50 per cent.

2. Instant Coffee - Chicory Mixture means the product manufactured from roasted and ground coffee and
roasted and ground chicory. It shall be in sound dry and dust free condition with no rancid or obnoxious flavour. It
shall be in the form ofa free flowing powder or shall be in the agglomerated (granules) form having the colour, taste
and flavour characteristics of coffee chicory powder. It shall be free from any impurities and shall not contain any
other added substance. The coffee content in the mixture shall not be less than 51 per cent by mass on dry basis.
The percentage of coffee and chicory used shall be marked on the label as provided in Regulation 2.4.5 (1) (11) of
Food Safety and Standards (Packaging and Labeling) Regulations, 2011.

It shall conform to the following standards, namely:—

(i) Moisture Not more than 4.0 per cent.
(i) Total ash on dry basis Not more than 10 per cent.
(ii) Acid insoluble ash on dry basis Not more than 0.6 per cent.
(iv) Caffeine (anhydrous) Not less than 1.4 per cent on dry basis.
(v) Solubility in boiling water Dissolves readily in 30 seconds with moderate
stirring
(vi) Solubility in cold water at 16+ 20C Soluble with moderate stirring in 3 minutes

2.10.5 Beverages - ALCOHOLIC

1. TODDY: Toddy means the sap from coconut, date, toddy palm tree or any other kind of palm tree which has
undergone alcoholic fermentation. It shall be white cloudy in appearance which sediments on storage and shall
possess characteristic flavour derived from the sap and fermentation without addition of extraneous alcohol. It shall
be free from added colouring matter, dirt, other foreign matter or any other ingredient injurious to health. It shall also
be free from chloral hydrate, paraldehyde, sedative, tranquilizer and artificial sweetener.

It shall also conform to the following standards, namely:
Alcoholic content Not less than 5 percent (v/v)

Total acid as Tartaric acid (expressed in terms of Not less than 400 grams
100 litres of absolute alcohol)


408 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

Volatile acid as Acetic acid expressed in terms of Not more than 100 grams
100 litres of absolute alcohol)

2.10.6 BEVERAGES NON-ALCOHOLIC - CARBONATED

1. CARBONATED WATER means water conforming to the standards prescribed for Packaged Drinking Water
under Food Safety and Standard Act, 2006 impregnated with carbon dioxide under pressure and may contain any of
the following singly or in combination:

1. Sugar, liquid glucose, dextrose monohydrate, invert sugar, fructose, honey, fruits and vegetables
extractives and permitted flavouring, colouring matter, preservatives, emulsifying and stabilising agents,
citric acid, fumaric acid and sorbitol, tartaric acid, phosphoric acid, lactic acid, ascorbic acid, malic acid, edible
gums such as guar, karaya, arabic carobean, furcellaran, tragacanth, gum ghatti, edible gelatin, albumin,
licorice and its derivatives, salts of sodium, calcium and magnesium, vitamins, Caffeine not exceeding 145
parts per million, Estergum (Glycerol ester of wood resin) not exceeding 100 parts per million, Gellan Gum at
GMP level and quinine salts not exceeding 100 parts per million (expressed as quinine sulphate). It may also
contain Saccharin Sodium not exceeding 100 ppm or Acesulfame-K not exceeding 300 ppm or Aspertame
(methyl ester) not exceeding 700 ppm. or sucralose not exceeding 300 ppm or Neotame not exceeding 33 ppm.

Provided that the quantity of added sugar shall be declared on the container / bottle and if no sugar is
added that also shall be declared on the container/bottle as laid down in labelling Regulations 2.4.5 (24,25,26,
28 and 29) of Food Safety and Standards (Packaging and Labeling) Regulations, 2011. In case of returnable
bottles, which are recycled or refilling the declaration of quantity of added sugar and no sugar added may be
given on the crown.

Provided also that the declaration of ‘no sugar added' shall not be applicable for ‘carbonated water (plain
soda)’.

Provided also that the products which contain aspertame, acesulfame or any other artificial sweetener for
which special labeling provisions have been provided under regulations 2.4.5 (24,25,26, 28 and 29) of Food Safety
and Standards (Packaging and Labeling) Regulations, 2011, shall not be packed, stored, distributed or sold in
returnable containers.

It shall conform to the following requirements, namely—

(1) Total plate count per ml not more than that......50..cfu..

(2) Coliform count in 100 ml ....... 0... cfu...

(3) Yeast and mould count per ml not more than... 2.....cfu

Provided further estergum used in carbonated water shall have the following standards, namely:—

Glycerol esters of wood rosins commonly known as ester-gum is hard yellow to pale amber coloured solid. It
is a complex mixture of tri and diglycerol esters of rosin acids from wood rosin. It is produced by the esterification
of pale wood rosin with food grade glycerol. It is composed of approximately 90 per cent rosin acids and 10 per cent
neutrals (non-acidic compounds). The resin acid fraction is a complex mixture of isomeric diterpeniod monocarboxylic
acids having the typical molecular formula of C,9 H39 O, chiefly abietic acid. The substance is purified by steam
stripping or by counter-current steam distillation.

Identification:
Solubility-Insoluble in water, soluble in acetone and in Benzene.

Infra Red Spectrum-Obtain the infra-red spectram of a thin film of the sample deposited on a potassium
bromide plate-scan between 600 and 4000 wave numbers. Compare with typical spectrum obtained from pure ester-
gum.

Test for absence of till oil rosin (Sulphur test)-Pass the test as given below:

When sulphur-containing organic compounds are heated in the presence of sodium formate, the sulphur is
converted to hydrogen sulfide which can readily be detected by the use of lead acetate paper. A positive test
indicates the use of till oil rosin instead of wood rosin.

Apparatus-Test Tube: Use a standard, 10x75 mm, heat-resistant, glass test tube, Burner - Bunsen: A small size
burner of the microflame type is preferred.


[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 409

Reagents
Sodium Formate Solution: Dissolve 20g of reagent grade sodium formate, NaQOCH, in 100 ml of distilled water.
Lead Acetate Test Paper: Commercially available from most chemical supply houses.

Procedure-Weigh 40-50 mg of sample into a test tube and 1-2 drops of sodium formate solution. Place a strip
of lead acetate test paper over the mouth of the test tube. Heat the tube in the burner flame until fumes are formed
that contact the test paper. Continue heating for 2-5 minutes. There must be no formation of a black spot of lead
sulphide indicating the presence of sulphur containing compounds.

Detection Limit: 50 mg/kg sulphur).

Drop softening point-Between 880 C and 960 C.
Arsenic-Not more than 3ppm.

Lead-Not more than 10ppm.

Heavy metals (as lead)-Not more than 40 ppm.
Acid value- Between 3 and 9.

Hydroxyl number-Between 15 and 45.

2.10.7 Mineral water

1, Mineral water means includes all kinds of Mineral Water or Natural mineral water by whatever name it is
called and sold.

2. Description and Types of Mineral water.
(i) Natural mineral water is water clearly distinguished from ordinary drinking water because -

(a) it is characterized by its content of certain mineral salts and their relative proportions and the
presence of trace elements or of other constituents;

(b) it is obtained directly from natural or drilled sources from underground water bearing strata
and not from Public water supply for which all possible precautions should be taken within the
protected perimeters to avoid any pollution of, or external influence on, the chemical and physical
qualities of natural mineral water.

(c) of the constancy of its composition and the stability of its discharge and its temperature, due
account being taken of the cycles of minor natural fluctuations;

(d) it is collected under conditions which guarantee the original microbiological purity and chemical
composition of essential components;

(e) itis packaged close to the point of emergence of the source with particular hygienic precautions;
(f) it is not subjected to any treatment other than those permitted by this standard;

(ii) Naturally Carbonated Natural Mineral Water - A naturally carbonated natural mineral water is a
natural mineral water which, after possible treatment as given hereunder and re-incorporation of gas from the
same source and after packaging taking into consideration usual technical tolerance, has the same content of
carbondioxide spontaneously and visibly given off under normal conditions of temperature and pressure.

(iii) Non-Carbonated Natural Mineral Water- A non-carbonated natural mineral water is a natural mineral
water which, by nature and after possible treatment as given hereunder and after packaging taking into
consideration usual technical tolerance, does not contain free carbon dioxide in excess of the amount necessary
to keep the hydrogen carbonate salts present in the water dissolved.

(iv) Decarbonated Natural Mineral Water - A decarbonated natural mineral is a natural mineral water
which, after possible treatment as given hereunder and after packaging, has less carbon dioxide content than
that at emergence and does not visibly and spontaneously give off carbon dioxide under normal conditions
of temperature and pressure.

(v) Natural Mineral Water Fortified with Carbon Dioxide from the Source - A natural mineral water
fortified with carbon dioxide from the source is a natural mineral water which, after possible treatment as given
hereunder and after packaging, has more carbon dioxide content than that at emergence.


410

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

(vi) Carbonated Natural Mineral Water - A carbonated natural mineral water is a natural mineral water
which, after possible treatment as given hereunder and after packaging, has been made effervescent by the
addition of carbon dioxide from another origin.

2. Treatment and handling:- Treatment permitted includes separation from unstable constituents, such as
compounds containing iron, manganese, sulphur or arsenic, by decantation and/or filtration, if necessary, accelerated
by previous aeration.

The treatments provided may only be carried out on condition that the mineral content of the water is not
modified in its essential constituents, which give the water its properties.

The transport of natural mineral waters in bulk containers for packaging or for any other process before
packaging is prohibited. Natural Mineral water shall be packaged in clean and sterile containers.

The source on the point of emergence shall be protected against risks of pollution.

The installation intended for the production of natural mineral waters shall be such as to exclude any possibility
of contamination. For this purpose, and in particular —

(a) the installations for collection, the pipes and the reservoirs shall be made from materials suited to the
water and in such a way as to prevent the introduction of foreign substances into the water,

(b) the equipment and its use for production, especially installations for washing and packaging, shall
meet hygienic requirements;

(c) if, during production it is found that the water is polluted, the producer shall stop all operations until
the cause of pollution is eliminated;

(d) The related packaging and labelling requirements are provided in the Regulation 2.1.2 , 2.2.1 and
2.4.5 of Food Safety and Standards (Packaging and Labeling) Regulations, 2011.

3, All Mineral Water shall conform to the following standards, namely:—

SLNo. Characteristic Requirements

ag @® G3)

(1) Colour, hazen unit/true colour unit not more than 2

(2) Odour Agreeable

(3) Taste Agreeable

(4) Turbidity Not more than 2 nephelometric turbidity unit (NTU)
(5) Total Dissolved Solids 150-700 mg/litre

() pH 65-85

(7) Nitrates (as NO3) Not more than 50 mg/litre
(8) Nitrites (as NO,) Not more than 0,02 mg/litre
(9) Sulphide (as H,S) Not more than 0.05 mg/litre
Not more than 0.05 mg/litre
(10) Mineral oil Absent
(11) Phenolic compounds (as CsH,;OH) Absent
(12) Manganese (as Mn) Not more than 2.0 mg/litre
(13) Copper (as Cu) Not more than 1 mg/litre
(14) = Zinc (as Zn) Not more than 5 mg/litre
(15) Fluoride (as F) Not more than | mg/litre
(16) Barium (as Ba) Not more than 1.0 mg/litre
(17) Antimony (as Sb) Not more than 0.005 mg/litre
(18) — Nickel (as Ni) Not more than 0.02 mg/litre



[art II—ars 4] URI AT USA : ATR 411

(19) Borate (as B) Not more than 5 mg/litre
(20) Surface active agents Not detectable
(21) ‘Silver (as Ag) Not more than 0.01 mg/litre
(22) Chlorides (as Cl) Not more than 200 mg/litre
(23) Sulphate (as SO,) Not more than 200 mg/litre
(24) Magnesium (as Mg) Not more than 50 mg/litre
(25) Calcium (as Ca) Not more than 100 mg/litre
(26) Sodium (as Na) Not more than 150 mg/litre
(27) Alkalinity (as HCO3) 75-400 mg/litre
(28) Arsenic (as As) Not more than 0.05 mg/litre
(29) Cadmium (as Cd) Not more than 0.003 mg/litre
(30) Cyanide (as CN) Absent
(31) Chromium (as Cr) Not more than 0.05 mg/litre
(32) Mercury (as Hg) Not more than 0.001 mg/litre
(33) Lead (as Pb) Not more than 0.01 mg/litre
(34) Selenium (as Se) Not more than 0.05 mg/litre
(35) — Poly nuclear aromatic hydrocarbons Not Detectable
(36) Polychlorinated biphenyle Not detectable

(PCB)
(37) Pesticide Residue below detectable limits
(38) "Alpha" activity Not more than 0.1 Bacquerel/litre (Bq)
(39) "Beta" activity Not more than 1 Bacquerel/litre (Bq)]
(40) Yeast and mould counts Absent
(41) Salmonella and Shigella Absent
(42) E.Coli or thermotolerant Coliforms Absent

1x250ml
(43) Total coliform bacteria Absent

Ax250ml
(44) ‘Fecal streptococci and Absent

Staphylococcus aureus

1x250ml
(45) Pseudomonas aeruginosa Absent

1x250ml
(46)  Sulphite-reducing anaerobes Absent

1x50ml
(47)  Vibrocholera Absent

1x250ml
(48) V Paraheamolyticus Absent

1x250ml

2.10.8 Packaged drinking water (other than Mineral water):- means water derived from surface water or underground
water or sea water which is subjected to hereinunder specified treatments, namely, decantation, filteration, combination of
filteration, aerations, filteration with membrane filter depth filter, cartridge filter, activated carbon filteration, de-mineralisation,
re-mineralisation, reverse osmosis and packed after disinfecting the water to a level that shall not lead to any harmful
contamination in the drinking water by means of chemical agents or physical methods to reduce the number of micro-
organisms to a level beyond scientifically accepted level for food safety or its suitability:


412

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY

[Part III—Sec. 4]

Provided that sea water, before being subjected to the above treatments, shall be subjected to desalination
and related processes

The related packaging and labelling requirements are provided in regulation 2.1.2 , 2.2.1 and 2.4.5 of Food
Safety and Standards (Packaging and Labeling) Regulations, 2011.

It shall conform to the following standards namely:

SLNo. Characteristic Requirements
@) G3)
(1) Colour not more than 2 Hazen Units/ True Colour Units
(2) Odour Agreeable
(3) Taste Agreeable
(4) Turbidity Not more than 2 nephelometric turbidity unit (NTU)
(5) Total Dissolved Solids Not more than 500 mg/litre
(6) pH 6.5-8.5
(7) Nitrates (as NO3) Not more than 45 mg/litre
(8) Nitrites (as NO,) Not more than 0,02 mg/litre
(9) Sulphide (as H,S) Not more than 0.05 mg/litre
(10) Mineral Oil Absent
(11) Phenolic compounds Absent

(as CSH;OH)
(12) Manganese (as Mn) Not more than 0.1 mg/litre
(13) Copper (as Cu) Not more than 0.05 mg/litre
(14) = Zinc (as Zn) Not more than 5 mg/litre
(15) Fluoride (as F) Not more than 1.0 mg/litre
(16) Barium (as Ba) Not more than 1.0 mg/litre
(17) Antimony (as Sb) Not more than 0.005 mg/litre
(18) — Nickel (as Ni) Not more than 0.02 mg/litre
(19) Borate (as B) Not more than 5 mg/litre
(20) Anionic surface active agents (as MBAS) Not more than 0.2 mg/litre
(21) ‘Silver (as Ag) Not more than 0.01 mg/litre
(22) Chlorides (as Cl) Not more than 200 mg/litre
(23) Sulphate (as SO,) Not more than 200 mg/litre
(24) Magnesium (as Mg) Not more than 30 mg/litre
(25) Calcium (as Ca) Not more than 75 mg/litre
(26) Sodium (as Na) Not more than 200 mg/litre
(27) = Alkalinity (as HCO) Not more than 200 mg/litre
(28) Arsenic (as As) Not more than 0.05 mg/litre
(29) Cadmium (as CD) Not more than 0.01 mg/litre
(30) Cyanide (as CN) Absent
(31) Chromium (as Cr) Not more than 0.05 mg/litre
(32) Mercury (as Hg) Not more than 0.001 mg/litre
(33) Lead (as Pb) Not more than 0.01 mg/litre


[art II—avys 4] URI hl USA : ASAT 413
ag @® G3)
(34) Selenium (as Se) Not more than 0.01 mg/litre
(35) Iron (as Fe) Not more than 0.1 mg/litre
(36) Poly nuclear aromatic Hydrocarbons Not detectable
(37) Polychlorinated biphenyle (PCB) Not detectable
(38) Aluminium (asAl Not more than 0,03 mg/litre
(39) Residual free chlorine Not more than 0.2 mg/litre
(40) (i) Pesticide residues considered
individually - Not more than 0.0001 mg/ litre
(The analysis shall be conducted by using Internationally
established test methods meeting the residue limits
specified herein).
(ii) Total pesticide residue — Not more than 0.0005 mg/litre.
(The analysis shall be conducted by Using Internationally
established test methods meeting the residue limits
specified herein).
(41) "Alpha" activity Not more than 0.1 picocurie/Litre (Bq)
(42) "Beta" activity Not more than 1 Bacquerel/Litre (Bq)
(43) Yeast and mould counts I x 250 ml. Absent
(44) Salmonella and Shigella Absent
1x250ml
(45) E.Coli or thermotolerant bacteria Absent
1x250ml
(46) Coliform bacteria 1 x 250 ml Absent
(47) Faecal streptococci and Absent
Staphylococus aureus
1x250ml
(48) Pseudomonas aeruginosa
1x50ml Absent
(49)  Sulphite reducing anaerobes
1x50 Absent
(50) Vibrio cholera and
V. parahaemolyticus
1x250ml Absent
(51) Aerobic Microbial Count The total viable colony count shall not exceed 100 per ml

2.11 OTHER FOOD PRODUCTAND INGREDIENTS

at 20°C to 22°C in 72 h on agar- agar or on agar - gelatin
mixture, and 20 per ml at 37°C in 24 h on agar-agar.

2.11.1 BAKING POWDER: means a combination capable, under conditions of baking, of yielding carbon
dioxide and consists of sodium bicarbonate, and acid-reacting material, starch or other neutral material.

The acid-reacting material of baking powder shall be :—

(a) tartaric acid or its salts, or both

(b) acid salts of phosphoric acid, or

(c) acid compounds of aluminium, or

(d) any combination of the foregoing.


414 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

When tested, baking powder shall yield not less than 10 per cent of its weight of carbon dioxide.

2.11.2 CATECHU (Edible) shall be the dried aqueous extract prepared from the heart-wood of Acacia Catechu.
It shall be free from infestation, sand, earth or other dirt and shall conform to the following standards:

(a) 5 ml. of 1 per cent aqueous solution and 0.1 per cent solution of ferric ammonium sulphate shall give
a dark green colour, which on the addition of sodium hydroxide solution shall change to purple.

(b) When dried to constant weight at 100°C, it shall not lose more than 16 per cent of its weight.
(c) Water insoluble residue (dried at 100°C) shall not be more than 25 per cent by weight. Water insoluble
matter shall be determined by boiling water.

(d) Alcohol insoluble Not more than 30 per
residue in 90 per cent cent by weight.
alcohol dried at 100°C

(e) Total ash on dry basis Not more than 8 per cent
by weight.
(f) Ash insoluble in HCl Not more than 0.5 per cent
on dry weight basis.

Provided that in case of Bhatti Katha, the ash insoluble in dilute hydrochloric acid on dry basis shall not be
more than 1.5 per cent.

2.11.3 GELATIN shall be purified product obtained by partial hydrolysis of collagen, derived from the skin, white
connective tissues and bones of animals. It shall be colourless or pale yellowish and translucent in the form of sheets,
flakes, shreds or coarse to fine powder. It shall have very slight odour and taste but not objectionable which is characteristic
and boluillon like. It is stable in air when dry but is subject to microbial decomposition when moist or in soluble. It shall not
contain:—

(a) more than 15 per cent moisture;

(b) more than 3.0 per cent of total ash;

(c) more than 1000 parts per million of sulphur dioxide;
(d) less than 15 per cent of nitrogen, on dry weight basis.

2.11.4 SILVER LEAF (Chandi-ka-warq): food grade-shall be in the form of sheets, free from creases and folds and
shall contain not less than 99.9 per cent of silver.

2.11.5 Pan Masala means the food generally taken as such or in conjunction with Pan, it may contain;—

Betelnut, lime, coconut, catechu, saffron, cardamom, dry fruits, mulethi, sabnermusa, other aromatic herbs and
spices, sugar, glycerine, glucose, permitted natural colours, menthol and non prohibited flavours.

It shall be free from added coaltar colouring matter and any other ingredient injurious to health.

It shall also conform to the following standards namely:—

Total ash Not more than 8.0 percent by weight (on dry
basis)

Ash insoluble in dilute HCl acid Not more than 0.5 per cent by weight (on dry
basis)

2.11.6: LOW AND HIGH FAT COCOA POWDER means the powder which is the partially defatted product derived
from the cocoa bean the seed of Theobroma cocoa L. It may be subjected to treatments during manufacture with alkali and/
or magnesium carbonate, bicarbonate, and with tartaric, citric or phosphoric acids. It shall be free from rancidity, dirt, filth,
insects and insect fragments or fungus infestations.The product may contain food additives permitted in Appendix A. It
shall conform to the following standards:—

Total ash Not more than 14.0 per cent
(on moisture and fat free basis).

Ash insoluble in dilute HC] Not more than 1.0 per cent
(on moisture and fat free basis).


[art II—avys 4] FRA AT USTIA + STH 415

Alkalinity of total ash Not more than 6.0 per cent as K20 (on moisture and
fat free basis)

Cocoa butter
(i) for low fat Not less than 10.0 percent (on moisture free basis)
(ii) for high fat Not less than 20.0 percent (on moisture free basis)

2.11.7: CAROB POWDER means the powder obtained from the roasted pods of carob (fibbled carob) of Ceratonia
Siliqua (L) Taub. (fam. Leguminosae) and shall be free from husk. It shall be free from any artificial colouring, flavouring,
extraneous matter or glazing substance and shall be in sound, dry and fresh condition, free from rancid or obnoxious
flavours. It shall also conform to the following standards, namely:—

Total ash Not more than 1.2 per cent by weight.

Acid insoluble matter Not more than 5 per cent by weight.

Tannin content Not less than 0.1 per cent and not more than 0.15
percent.

2.12: Proprietary Food

2.12.1
1) Proprietary food means a food that has not been standardized under these regulations

2) In addition to the provisions including labelling requirements specified under these regulations, the
proprietary foods shall also conform to the following requirements, namely:—

(i) the name describing as clearly as possible, the nature or composition of food and/or category of the
food under which it falls in these regulations shall be mentioned on the label

(ii) the proprietary food product shall comply with all other regulatory provisions specified in these
regulations and in Appendices A and B.

2.13 IRRADIATION OF FOOD

2.13.1: Dose of Irradiation:
1) Same as provided in regulation 2.13.1 (2) no food shall be irradiated.

2) No article of food permitted for irradiation specified in column 2 of the Table given below shall receive the
dose of irradiation in excess of the quantity specified in column 3 of the said Table at the time of irradiation :—

SLNo. Name of Foods Dose of Irradiation (KGY)
Minimum Maximum Overall average

1. Onions 0.03 0.09 0.06
2. Spices 6 14 10
3. Potatoes 0.06 0.15 0.10
4. Rice 0.25 1.0 0.62
5.  Semolina (Sooji or Rawa),

Wheat, atta and Maida 0.25 1.0 0.62
6. Mango 0.25 0.75 0.50
7. Raisins, Figs and Dried Dates 0.25 0.75 0.50
8 Ginger, Garlic and Shallots (Small Onions) 0.03 0.15 0.09
9. Meat and Meat Products including Chicken 25 40 3.25
10. Fresh Sea foods 1.0 3.0 2.00
11. Frozen Sea foods 40 6.0 5.00
12. Dried Sea foods 0.25 1.0 0.62

13. Pulses 0.25 1.0 0.62


416 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

3) Routine quantitative dosimentry shall be made during operation and record kept of such measurement as
provided under Deptt. of Atomic Energy (Control of Irradiation of Food) Rules 1991.

2.13.2: Requirement for the process of Irradiation:—
1) Approval of facilities - No irradiation facility shall be used for the treatment of food unless such facility
(i) has been approved and licensed under the Atomic Energy (Control of Irradiation of Food) Rules, 1991.

(ii) complies with the conditions for approval, operation, license and process control prescribed under the
Atomic Energy (Control of Irradiation of Food) Rules 1991.

(iii) carries out irradiation in accordance with the provisions of the Atomic Energy (Control of Irradiation of
Food) Rules,1991.

2) Foods once irradiated shall not be re-irradiated unless specifically so permitted by the Licensing Authority
for the Irradiation process control purposes.

3) No Food/irradiated food shall leave the irradiation facility unless it has been irradiated in accordance with
the provisions of Deptt. of Atomic Energy (Control of Irradiation of Food) Rules, 1991 and a certificate of irradiation
indicating the dose of irradiation and the purpose of irradiation is provided by the competent authority.

2.13.3: Restrictions on Irradiation of Food:

1) The irradiation shall conform to the dose limit and the radiation source to the specific conditions prescribed
for each type or category of Food specified for treatment by irradiation, under the Atomic Energy (Control of
Irradiation of Food) Rules, 1991.

2) Food which has been treated by irradiation shall be identified in such a way as to prevent its being
subjected to re-irradiation.

3) The irradiation shall be carried out only by personnel having the minimum qualifications and training as
prescribed for the purpose under the Atomic Energy (Control of Irradiation of Food) Rules,1991.

4) Food once irradiated shall not be re-irradiated unless specifically so permitted under these regulations.

2.13.4: Record of Irradiation of Food:

Any treatment of Food by irradiation shall be recorded by an officer authorised by the competent authority as
specified under the Deptt. of Atomic Energy (Control of Irradiation of Food) Rules, 1991 as follows :—

(a) Name of the article;
(b) License No.;
(c) Name, address and other details of Licensee;
(d) Purpose of Irradiation;
(e) Source of Irradiation;
(f) Date of Irradiation;
(g) Dose of Irradiation;
(h) Serial Number of Batch;
(i) The nature, quality of Food to be irradiated and the Batch number;
Gj) Quantity of Food Irradiated;
(k) Physical appearance of article; before and after irradiation;

(1) Type of packaging used during the irradiation treatment and for packing the irradiated food;

2.13.5: Standards of Irradiated Food :

The irradiated foods shall comply with all the provisions of the Food Safety and Standards Act and the
regulations made thereunder specifying standards of such food.

2.13.6: Storage and sale of irradiated food. Save as otherwise provided in these regulations, no person shall irradiate
for sale, store for sale, or transport for sale irradiated food.

2.13.7: Restriction on sale of Irradiated Food.- Irradiated food shall be offered for sale only in prepackaged conditions,


[art II—avys 4] FRA AT USTIA + STH 417

Chapter 3:
SUBSTANCES ADDED TO FOOD
3.1: Food Additives

For the purpose of this regulation "Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) for use of food additives" means
the food additives used under the following conditions namely

(i) the quantity of the additive added to food shall be limited to the lowest possible level necessary to
accomplish its desired effect;

(ii) the quantity of the additive becomes a component of food as a result of its uses in the manufacturing,
processing or packaging of a food and which is not intended to accomplish any physical or other technical
effect in the food itself; is reduced to the extent reasonably possible; and

(iii) the additive is prepared and handled in the same way as a food ingredient.

1) Use of Food Additives in Food Products:
The food products may contain food additives as specified in these Regulations and in Appendix A.

2) Use of food additives in traditional foods. - The traditional foods namely, - Snacks of Savouries (Fried
Products), such as Chiwda, Bhujia, Dalmoth, Kadubale, Kharaboondi, Spiced and fried dals, banana chips and
similar fried products sold by any name, Sweets, Carbohydrates based and Milk product based, such as Halwa,
Mysore Pak, Boondi Ladoo, Jalebi,Khoya Burfi, Peda, Gulab Jamun, Rasogolla and similar milk product based
sweets sold by any name, Instant Mixes Powders only of Idli mix, dosa mix, puliyogare mix, pongal mix, gulabjamoon
mix, jalebi mix, vada mix, Rice and Pulses based Papads, Ready-to-Serve Beverages (tea/coffee based only) may
contain food additives permitted in these regulations and in Table 2 of Appendix A.

3) Use of additives in Bread, Biscuits - The food products such as Bread and Biscuits, may contain food
additives permitted in these regulations and in Table 1 of Appendix A.

4) Use of Food Additives in different foods. - The following food products may contain food additives
permitted in these regulations and in Table 3 of Appendix A, namely:-

(i) Dairy based drinks, flavoured and or fermented (e.g. chocolate milk) cocoa, eggnog-UHT Sterilised
shelf life more than three months), Synthetic soft drink concentrate, mix/fruit based beverage mix, soups,
bullions and taste makers, dessert jelly, custard powder, jelly crystal, flavour emulsions and flavour paste (for
use in carbonated and non-carbonated beverages);

(ii) Sausages and sausage meat containing raw meat, cereals and condiments.

(iii) Fruit pulp or juice (not dried) for conversions into jam or crystallized glazed or cured fruit or other
product;

(iv) Corn Flour and such like starches;
(v) Corn syrup;

(vi) Canned Rasogolla (the cans shall be internally) lacquered with sulphur dioxide resistant lacquer;
(vii) Gelatine;

(viii) Beer;

(ix) Cider;

(x) Alcoholic Wines;

(xi) Non-alcoholic wines;

(xii) Ready-to-Serve beverage;

(xiii) Brewed ginger beer;

(xiv) Coffee Extract;

(xv) Danish tinned caviar;

(xvi) Dried ginger;


418

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

(xvii) Flour confectionery;

(xviii) Smoked fish (in wrappers);

(xix) Dry mixes of Rasgollas;

(xx) Preserved Chapaties;

(xxi) Fat Spread;

(xxii) Prunes;

(xxiii) Baked food confections and baked foods;
(xxiv) Flour for baked food;

(xxv) Packed Paneer;

(xxvi) Cakes and Pastries; and

(xxvii) Prepackaged Coconut Water, Canned Rasogulla.

3.1.2 Colouring Matter

1) Unauthorized addition of colouring matter prohibited - The addition of colouring matter to any article of
food except as specifically permitted by these regulations is prohibited.

2) Natural colouring matters which may be used - Except as otherwise provided in these Regulations and
Appendices, the following natural colouring principles whether isolated from natural colours or produced synthetically
may be used in or upon any article of food.

(a) Carotene & Carotenoids including
(i) Beta-carotene;
(ii) Beta-apo 8'- carotenal;
(iii) Methylester of Beta-apo 8' carotenoic acid,
(iv) Ethylester of Beta-apo 8' carotenoic acid,
(v) Canthaxanthin;

(b) Chlorophyll;

(c) Riboflavin (Lactoflavin).

(d) Caramel.

(e) Annatto

(f) Saffron

(g) Curcumin or turmeric

Explanation - In the preparation of the solution of annatto colour in oil, any edible vegetable oil listed in
Chapter 2 to these regulations may be used either singly or in combination and the name of the oil or oils used shall
be mentioned on the label as provided in Regulation 2.4.2(10) of Food Safety and Standards (Packaging and
Labeling) Regulations, 2011.

3) Addition of inorganic colouring matters and pigments prohibited - Inorganic colouring matters and pigments
shall not be added to any article of food unless otherwise provided in these Regulations and Appendices

4) Synthetic food colours which may be used

No Synthetic food colours or a mixture thereof except the following shall be used in food.


[art II—avys 4] FRA AT USTIA + STH 419

S? Colour Common name Colour index (1956) Chemical class
No.
1 Red Ponceau 4R 16255 AZo
Carmoisine 14720 AZo
Erythrosine 45430 Xanthene
2. Yellow Tartrazine 19140 Pyrazolone
Sunset Yellow FCF 15985 AZo
3. Blue Indigo Carmine 73015 Indigoid
Brilliant Blue FCF 42090 Triarylmethane
4. Green Fast Green FCF 42053 Triarylmethane

5) Use of Lake Colours as colourant in foods

Aluminium Lake of Sunset Yellow FCF may be used in powdered dry beverages mix (powdered soft drink
concentrate) upto a maximum limit of 0.04 percent by weight. The maximum limit of colour content in final beverage
for consumption shall not exceed 8.3 ppm and that of aluminium content shall not exceed 4.4 ppm of the final
beverage for consumption:

Provided that the powdered dry beverages mix (powdered soft drink concentrate) label shall give clear
instruction for reconstitution of product for making final beverage

(6) Use of permitted synthetic food colours prohibited - Use of permitted synthetic food colours in or upon
any food other than those enumerated below is prohibited :—

(i) Ice-cream, milk lollies, frozen desserts, flavoured milk, yoghurt, ice-cream mix-powder;
(ii) Biscuits including biscuit wafer, pastries, cakes, confectionery, thread candies, sweets, savouries

(dalmoth, mongia, phululab, sago papad, dal biji only);

(iii) Peas, strawberries and cherries in hermetically sealed containers, preserved or processed papaya,
canned tomato juice, fruit syrup, fruit squash, fruit crushes, fruit cordial, jellies, jam, marmalade, candied
crystallised or glazed fruits;

(iv) Non-alcoholic carbonated and non-carbonated ready to serve synthetic beverages including
synthetic syrups, sharbats, fruit bar, fruit beverages, fruit drinks, synthetic soft-drink concentrates;

(v) Custard powder;

(vi) Jelly crystal and ice-candy;

(vii) Flavour emulsion and flavour paste for use in carbonated or non-carbonated beverages only under
label declaration as provided in regulation 2.4.5 (35) of Food Safety and Standards (Packaging and Labeling)
Regulations, 2011.

7) Maximum limit of permitted synthetic food colours - The maximum limit of permitted synthetic food colours
or mixture thereof which may be added to any food article enumerated in regulation 3.1.2(6) and Appendix A of these
Regulations shall not exceed 100 parts per million of the final food or beverage for consumption, except in case of
food articles mentioned in clause (iii) of regulation 3.1.2 (6) where the maximum limit of permitted synthetic food
colours shall not exceed 200 parts per million of the final food or beverage for consumption.

8) Colours to be pure - The colours specified in these Regulations, when used in the preparation of any article
of food shall be pure and free from any harmful impurities.

3.1.3 Artificial Sweeteners
1) Use and sale of artificial Sweeteners

Artificial sweeteners mentioned in column 2 of the table below, may be used only in the food articles mentioned
in column 3 and in quantities not exceeding the limits mentioned in column 4 and as per provision contained in these


420 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

regulations and Appendices and shall bear the label declarations as provided in the regulation 2.4.5 (24, 25, 26, 27,
28 & 29) of Food Safety and Standards (Packaging and Labeling) Regulations, 2011.

SL Name of Artificial Article of food Maximum limit of Artificial
No. Sweetener
1 2 3 4
I Saccharin Sodium Carbonated Water 100 ppm
Soft Drink Concentrate *100 ppm
Supari 4000 ppm
Pan Masala 8000 ppm
Pan Flavouring Material 8.0 percent
Synthetic Syrup for dispenser 450 ppm

Sweets (Carbohydrates based and Milk
products based) : Halwa, Mysore Pak,
Boondi Ladoo, Jalebi, Khoya Burfi, Peda,
Gulab Jamun, Rasogolla and similar milk

product based sweets sold by any name. 500 ppm
Chocolate (White, Milk, Plain, Composite And Filled) 500 ppm
Sugar based/ Sugar free confectionery 3000 ppm
Chewing gum /Bubble gum 3000 ppm
II. Aspartame (methylester) Carbonated Water 700 ppm
Soft Drink concentrate *700 ppm
Biscuits, Bread, Cakes and Pasteries 2200 ppm

Sweets (Carbohydrates based and Milk products based) :
Halwa, Mysore Pak, Boondi Ladoo, Jalebi, Khoya Burfi,
Peda, Gulab Jamun, Rasogolla and similar milk product

based sweets sold by any name 200 ppm
Jam, Jellies, Marmalades 1000 ppm
Chocolate (White, Milk, Plain, Composite And Filled) 2000 ppm
Sugar based/ Sugar free confectionery 10000 ppm
Chewing gum/ Bubble gum 10000 ppm
Synthetic Syrup for dispenser 3000 ppm
Custard powder mix 1000 ppm
Vegetarian jelly crystals 3000 ppm
Fruit Nectar 600 ppm
Vegetable Nectar 600 ppm
Ice Cream, Frozen Dessert and Pudding 1000 ppm
Flavoured Milk 600 ppm
Ready to Serve Tea and Coffee based Beverages 600 ppm
Yoghurt 600 ppm
Ready to eat Cereals 1000 ppm
Non-Carbonated water based beverages (non-alcoholic) 600 ppm
I. Acesulfame Potassium Carbonated water 300 ppm
Soft Drink concentrate *300 ppm
Biscuits, Bread, Cakes and Pasteries 1000 ppm

Sweets (Carbohydrates based and Milk products based) :

Halwa, Mysore Pak, Boondi Ladoo, Jalabi, Khoya Burfi,

Peda, Gulab Jamun, Rasogolla and similar milk product

based sweets sold by any name 500 ppm


[art I—ave 4] TNT Al UTI : SATIN 421

1 2 3 4
Chocolate (White, Milk, Plain, Composite and Filled) 500 ppm
Sugar based/ Sugar free confectionery 3500 ppm
Chewing gum/ Bubble gum 5000 ppm
Synthetic Syrup for dispenser 1500 ppm
Ready to serve tea and coffee based Beverages 600 ppm
Ice lollies / ice candy 800 ppm
cereal based beverages 500 ppm
Fruit Nectars 300ppm
Concentrate for fruit nectars 300 ppm (in final

Beverage for
consumption)

Non carbonated water based beverages (non alcoholic) 300ppm

IV. Sucralose Carbonated water 300 ppm
Soft drink concentrate *300 ppm
Biscuits, breads, cakes and Pastries 750 ppm
Sweets (Carbohydrates based and Milk products based) :
Halwa, Mysore Pak, Boondi Ladoo, Jalebi, Khoya Burfi,
Peda, Gulab Jamun, Rasogolla and similar milk product
based sweets sold by any name 750 ppm
Yoghurts 300 ppm
Sweetened butter milk 300 ppm
Ice Cream 400 ppm
Jam, Jellies and Marmalades 450 ppm
Frozen fruit 150 ppm
Chutney 800 ppm
Confectionery 1500 ppm
Chewing gum 1250 ppm
Cookies 750 ppm
Doughnuts /scones /muffins 800 ppm
Cake mixes 700 ppm
Ready to serve tea and coffee beverages 600 ppm
Ice lollies/Ice candy 800 ppm
Vegetable juice 250 ppm
Vegetable nectar 250 ppm
Concentrates for vegetable juice 1250 ppm
Concentrate for vegetable nectar 1250 ppm
Lozenges 1500 ppm
Non-carbonated water based beverages (non-alcoholic) 300 ppm
Jelly Crystals *300 ppm
Custard powder/ ready to eat custard dessert *260 ppm
Chocolate 800 ppm
Dried ice cream mixes **400 PPM
Frozen Dessert 400 PPM
Milk lollies and milk ices 400 PPM

Vos Neotame Carbonated water 33 ppm
Soft drink concentrate *33 ppm



422

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

Explanation I: Pan flavouring material refers to the flavouring agents permitted for human consumption to be
used for pan. It shall be labelled as—

"PAN FLAVOURING MATERIAL"

*F'xplanation IT: Maximum limit of artificial sweetener in the product shall be as in reconstituted beverage or
food or in final beverage or food for consumption, as the case may be. The product label shall give clear instruction
for reconstitution of products for making final beverage or food for consumption as the case may be.

Provided where the artificial sweetener(s) is/are used in carbonated water / sweetened aerated water / fruit
beverage / carbonated fruit beverage / fruit nectar, the requirement of minimum total soluble solids shall not apply

Provided further that Saccharin Sodium or Aspartame (Methyl ester) or Acesulfame Potassium or Sucralose or
Neotame may be sold individually as Table Top Sweetener and may contain the following carrier or filler articles with
label declaration as provided in Regulation 2.4.5 (24, 25, 26, 27, 28 & 29) of Food Safety and Standards (Packaging
and Labeling) Regulations, 2011. namely:—

(i) Dextrose

(ii) Lactose

(iti) Maltodextrin

(iv) Mannitol

(v) Sucrose

(vi) Isomalt

(vii) Citric Acid

(viii) Calcium silicate

(ix) Carboxymethyl Cellulose
(x) Cream of Tartar, IP

(xi) Cross Carmellose sodium
(xii) Colloidal silicone dioxide
(xiii) Glycine

(xiv) L-leucine

(xv) Magnesium stearate IP
(xvi) Purified Talc

(xvii) Poly vinyl pyrrolidone
(xviii) Providone

(xix) Sodium hydrogen carbonate
(xx) Starch

(xxi) Tartaric acid

(xxii) Erythritol .

Provided further also that where sucralose is marketed as Table Top Sweetener, the concentration of sucralose
shall not exceed six mg per tablet or hundred mg of granule.

** Explanation IT: Maximum limit of artificial sweetener in Dried Ice cream Mixes shall be as in reconstituted
ice-cream for consumption and the Dried Ice-cream Mixes label shall give clear instruction for reconstitution of
products for making final ice cream"

2) No mixture of artificial sweeteners shall be added to any article of food or in the manufacture of table top
sweeteners.

Provided that in case of carbonated water, softdrink concentrate and synthetic syrup for dispenser, wherein
use of aspertame and acesulfame potassium have been allowed in the alternative, as per Table under Regulation
3.1.3 (1), these artificial sweeteners may be used in combination with one or more alternative if the quantity of each
artificial sweetener so used does not exceed the maximum limit specified for that artificial sweetener in column (4) of


[art II—avys 4] FRA AT USTIA + STH 423

the said Table as may be worked out on the basis of proportion in which such artificial sweeteners are combined. The
products containing mixture of artificial sweeteners shall bear the label as provided in regulation 2.4.5 (28 & 29) of
Food Safety and Standards (Packaging and Labeling) Regulations, 2011.

Provided that in carbonated water, the combination of Sucralose and Acesulfame K may be used on ratio not
to exceed proportionate levels of the permissible levels allowed for these individual artificial sweeteners in carbonated
water under label declaration in Regulation 2.4.5 (29) of Food Safety and Standards (Packaging and Labeling)
Regulations, 2011.

Provided further that mixture of Aspartame (methylester) and Acesulfame K (in ratio 2:1) may be marketed as
table top sweetener and may contain the carrier or filler articles as mentioned in the proviso given under the table in
Regulation 3.1.3 (1) and under label declaration as provided in regulation 2.4.5 (24, 25, 26, 28 & 29) of Food Safety
and Standards (Packaging and Labeling) Regulations, 2011.

Illustration:- In column (3) of the said Table, in carbonated water, Aspartame (Methyl Ester) or Acesulfame
Potassium may be added in the proportion of 700 ppm or 300 ppm respectively. If both artificial sweeteners are used
in combination and the proportion of aspartame (Methyl Ester) is 350 ppm, the proportion of Acesulfame Potassium
shall not exceed the proportion of 150 ppm;

3) No person shall sell table top sweetener except under label declaration as provided in these Regulations.

Provided that aspartame may be marked as a table top sweetener in tablet or granular form in moisture proof
packages and the concentration of aspartame shall not exceed 18 mg per 100 mg of tablet or granules.

4) Use of Polyols in Foods:

No polyols shall be added to any article of food except those mentioned in the table below, in quantities not
exceeding the limits shown against them as per provision contained in Appendix A of these Regulations and shall
bear the label declaration as per regulation 2.4.5 (46) of Food Safety and Standards (Packaging and Labeling)
Regulations, 2011.

SLNo Name of Polyols Article of Food Maximum limit

1.

2.

3.

Isomalt (i) Traditional Indian sweets (carbohydrate based and milk © GMP
based), halwa, mysore paag, boondi laddoo, jalebi,
khoya burfi, peda, gulab jamun, rasgulla, and similar
milk based sweets sold by any name

(i) Instant sweetmeat mixes (e.g. pongal mix, gulab jamun
mix, jalebi mix)

(iii) Bakery products

(iv) Jams, jellies and Marmalades

(v) Edible Ice

(vi

a

Ice cream, frozen dessert, sweetened yoghurt

Erythritol Dairy drinks (chocolate and flavoured milk), Carbonated GMP
Beverages, Non-Cabonated Water based Beverages
(non-alcoholic), Ice Cream, Yoghurt, Puddings, Non Dairy
Toppings, Bakery Mixes, Cakes, cookies & pastries, Ready to
eat breakfast cereals, soft candies, chocolate and hard candies

Maltitol / Maltitol syrup Bakery products, Ice Cream, Frozen Desserts, Jams, Jellies GMP
and Marmalades

5) Use of Polydextrose in Foods

Polydextrose may be used in following food articles as per GMP levels and proper label declaration as
provided in regulation 2.4.5 (47) of FSS (Packaging & Labeling) Reg. 2011.

Ice Cream, Frozen Desserts, Cakes, Biscuits, Yoghurt, Whip topping, Sugar boiled Confectionery, Lozenges,
Jam, fruit jelly, Traditional Indian sweets (carbohydrate based and milk based), halwa, mysore pak, boondi laddoo,
jalebi, khoya Burfi, peda, gulab jamun, rasgulla, and similar milk product based sweets sold by any name.


424 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

3.1.4: Preservatives - "Preservative" means a substance which when added to food, is capable of inhibiting, retarding
or arresting the process of fermentation, acidification or other decomposition of food.

1) Classification of Preservatives:
Preservatives shall be divided into following classes :
a. Class I preservative shall be :-
(1) Common salt.
(ii) Sugar.
(iti) Dextrose.
(iv) Glucose Syrup.
(v) Spices.
(vi) Vinegar or acetic acid.
(vii) Honey
(viii) Edible vegetable oils

Addition of Class I preservatives in any food is not restricted, unless otherwise provided in the regulations
including Appendix A.

Provided that the article of food to which a Class I preservative has been added conforms to the specifications
laid down in Chapter 2 of these regulations.

b. Class II preservatives shall be :-
(i) Benzoic acid including salts thereof,
(ii) Sulphurous acid including salts thereof,
(iii) Nitrates or Nitrites of Sodium or Potassium in respect of food like ham, pickled meat,

(iv) Sorbic acid including its sodium, potassium and calcium salts, propionates of calcium or
sodium, lactic acid, and acid calcium phosphate.

(v) Nisin
(vi) Sodium and calcium propionate.
(vii) Methyl or propyl Parahydroxy-Benzoate.
(viii) Propionic acid, including esters or salt thereof,
(ix) Sodium diacetate, and
(x) Sodium, potassium and calcium salts of lactic acid.

2) Use of more than one Class II preservative prohibited.

(i) No person shall use in or upon a food more than one Class II preservative:

Provided that where in column (2) of the table given in the regulation 3.1.4 (3) the use of more than
one preservative has been allowed in the alternative, those preservatives may, notwithstanding anything
contained in regulation 3.1.4 (3) of these Regulations, be used in combination with one or more
alternatives, provided the quantity of each preservative so used does not exceed such number of parts
out of those specified for that preservative in column (3) of the aforesaid table as may be worked out on
the basis of the proportion in which such preservatives are combined.

ILlustration.-In the group of foods specified in Item 6 of the table given in regulation 3.1.4 (3) of
these Regulations, sulphur dioxide or Benzoic acid can be added in the proportion of 40 parts per million
or 200 parts per million respectively. If both preservatives are used in combination and the proportion of
sulphur dioxide is 20 parts per million, the proportion of Benzoic acid shall not exceed the proportion of
100 parts per million.

3) Use of Class II preservatives restricted.

The use of Class II preservatives shall be restricted to the following group of foods in concentration not
exceeding the proportions given below against each.


[art II—avys 4] URI hl USA : ASAT 425
SI. No. Article of Food Preservative Parts per million
(1) (2) G3) (4)
1. Sausages and sausage meat containing raw meat , Sulphur dioxide 450
cereals and condiments
2. Fruit, fruit pulp, juice (not dried) for conversion into
jam or crystallized glace or cured fruit or other products :
a) Cherries -do- 2,000
b) Strawberries and raspberries -do- 2,000
c) Other fruits -do- 1,000
Fruit juice concentrate -do- 1,500
4. Dried Fruits
a) Apricots, peaches, apples, pears and other fruits -do- 2000
b) Raisins and Sultanas -do- 750
5. Other non alcoholic wines, squashes, crushes, Sulphur dioxide 350
fruit syrups, cordials, fruit juices and barley water or
to be used after dilution Benzoic acid 600
6. Jam , marmalade, preserve canned cherry and fruit jelly Sulphur dioxide 40
Or
Benzoic acid 200
7. Crystallized glace or cured fruit (including candid peel) Sulphur dioxide 150
8. Fruit and fruit pulp not otherwise specified in the schedule Sulphur dioxide 350
9, Plantation white sugar , cube sugar, dextrose, gur, jaggery, misri Sulphur dioxide 70
10. Khandsari (Sulphur) and Bura -do- 150
11. Refined sugar -do- 40
11. Corn flour and such like starches -do- 100
12. Cor syrup -do- 450
13. Canned Rasgolla (The cans shall be internally lacquered -do- 100
with sulphur dioxide resistant laquer)
14. Gelatine -do- 1000
15. Beer Sulphur dioxide 70
16. Cider -do- 200
17. Alcoholic Wines -do- 450
18. Ready to serve beverages Sulphur dioxide or 70
Benzoic Acid 120
19, Brewed ginger beer Benzoic Acid 120
20. Coffee extract -do- 450
21, Pickles and chutneys made from fruits or vegetables Benzoic Acid or 250
Sulphur dioxide 100
22. Tomato and other sauces Benzoic Acid 750


426 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

(1) (2) G3) (4)

23. Pickled meat and bacon Sodium and/or Potassium 200

Nitrite expressed as Sodium Nitrite

24. Cored Beef Sodium and/or Potassium 100
Nitrite expressed as Sodium Nitrite
25 Meat Food Products Sodium and /or Potassium Nitrite 200
expressed as Sodium Nitrite
26 Danish tinned caviar Benzoic acid 50
27. Dehydrated vegetables Sulphur dioxide 2,000
28. Tomato puree and paste Benzoic acid 750
29. Syrups and sharbats Sulphur dioxide 350
or
Benzoic acid 600
30. Dried ginger Sulphur dioxide 2,000
31. Cheese or processed cheese Sorbic acid including its 3,000
sodium, potassium and
calcium salt
(calculated as sorbic acid )
Nisin 12.5
32. Flour confectionery Sorbic acid including its sodium, 1,500

potassium and calcium salt
(calculated as sorbic acid )

33. Smoked fish (in wrappers) Sorbic acid Only
wrappers
may be
impregnated
with
sorbic
acid

34. Dry mixes of rasgollas Sulphur dioxide 100

35 a ) Soups (other than canned ) Sulphur dioxide 150

b) Dried Soups Sulphur dioxide 1,500

c) Dehydrated soup mix when packed in containers other than cans Sulphur dioxide 1,500

36. Fruits, vegetables , flakes, powder, figs Sulphur dioxide 600

37. Flour for baked food Sodium diacetates or 2,500

propionates or 3,200

methyl propyl hydroxy benzoate 500

38. Preserved chappatis Sorbic acid 1,500
39, Paneer or channa Sorbic acid and its sodium

potassium or
calcium salts (calculated as
sorbic acid) 2,000

Or



[art II—avys 4] FRA AT USTIA + STH 427

(1) (2) G3) (4)
Propionic acid and its sodium 2,000
or potassium salts (calculated
as propionic acid)

40. Fat spread Sorbic acid and its sodium 1,000
potassium and calcium salts
(calculated as sorbic acid)

Or

Benzoic acid and its sodium 1,000
or potassium salts

(calculated as benzoic acid) 1,000
or both

4l. Jams, jellies, marmalades, preserve, crystallized glazed or Sorbic acid and its sodium 500

candid fruits including candid peels fruit bars potassium or calcium salts
(calculated as sorbic acid)
42. Fruit juice concentrates with preservatives for conversion -do- 100
in juices, nectars for ready to serve beverages in bottles/
pouches selling through dispensers

43. Fruit juices (tin , bottles or pouches ) -do- 200

44, Nectars, ready to serve beverages in bottles/pouches -do- 50

selling through dispensers

45. Prunes Potassium Sorbate 1000

(calculated as sorbic acid)

4) Use of Class II preservatives in mixed foods

In a mixture of two or more foods or groups of foods mentioned against each item in the Table under
regulation 3.1.4 (3) of these Regulations the use of Class II preservative or preservatives shall be restricted to the
limit up to which the use of such preservative or preservatives is permitted for the foods or groups of foods
contained in such mixture.

Illustration.-In the food specified in item 23 of the table given in regulation 3.1.4 (3) sulphur dioxide can be
added to dehydrated vegetables in the proportion of 2,000 parts per million. If this food is mixed with the food
specified in item 24 given in the said table, that is to say tomato puree and paste, where benzoic acid is permitted to
an extent of 250 p.p.m., then in the mixture containing equal parts of these two foods, the proportion of Sulphur
dioxide and Benzoic acid, shall be 1,000 p.p.m. and 125 p.p.m. respectively.

5) Restriction on use of nitrate and nitrite.
No nitrate or nitrite shall be added to any infant food.
6) Use of Natamycin for surface treatment of — cheese (hard).

Natamycin may be used for surface treatment of cheese (hard) under label declaration as specified in Regulation
2.4.5 (33) of packaging and labeling regulations., subject to the following conditions, namely :—

(i) Maximum level of application of Natamycin shall not exceed 2mg/dm3
(ii) The penetration depth of Natamycin in cheese (hard) shall not exceed 2mm.

(iii) The maximum residue level of Natamycin in the finished cheese (hard) shall not exceed Img/dm3

3.1.5: Anti-oxidants,

1) "Anti-oxidant' means a substance which when added to food retards or prevents oxidative deterioration of
food and does not include sugar, cereal, oils, flours, herbs and spices;

2) Restriction on use of anti-oxidants.


428 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

No antioxidant other than lecithin, ascorbic acid and tocopherol shall be added to any food unless otherwise
provided in Chapter 2 and Appendix A of these Regulations

Provided that the following anti-oxidants, not exceeding in concentration mentioned against each, may be
added to edible oils and fats except ghee and butter, namely :—

1 Ethyl Gallate

2 Propyl gallate or mixture thereof 0.01 percent
3 Octyl gallate

4 Dodecyl gallate

5 Ascorbyl palmitate 0.02 percent
6 Butylated hydroxyanisole (BHA) 0.02 percent
7 Citric Acid 0.01 percent
8 Tartaric acid

9 Gallic acid

10 Resin Guaiace 0.05 percent
11.‘ Tertiary Butyl Hydro Quinone (TBHQ) 0.02 percent

Provided that dry mixes of Rassgollas and vadas may contain Butylated hydroxyanisole (BHA) not exceeding
0.02 per cent calculated on the basis of fat content:

Provided further that anti-oxidants permitted in the 3.1.5 (2) of these Regulations may be used in permitted
flavouring agents in concentration not exceeding 0.01 per cent.

Provided further that wherever Butylated hydroxyanisole (BHA) is used in conjunction with the anti-oxidants
mentioned at item Nos. | to 4 of the preceeding proviso, the quantity of the mixture shall not exceed the limit of 0.02
per cent:

Provided further that Ghee and Butter may contqin Butylated hydroxyanisole (BHA) in a concentration not
exceeding 0.02 per cent.

Provided further that fat spread may contain Buty/ated hydroxyanisole (BHA) or Tertiary butyl hydro quinone
(TBHQ) in a concentration not exceeding 0.02 per cent by weight on fat basis.

Provided further that ready-to-eat dry breakfast cereals may contain Butylated Hydroxanisole (BHA) not
exceeding 0.005 percent (SOppm).

Provided further that in ready to drink infant milk substitute, lecithin and ascrobyl palmitate may be used upto
maximum limit of 0.5 gm./100mlL and 1mg./ 100ml. respectively.

Provided further that chewing gum/ bubble gum may contain Butylated hydroxyanisol (BHA) not exceeding
250 ppm.

3) Use of anti-oxidants in Vitamin D Preparation: Vitamin D preparation may contain anti-oxidants prescribed
in Regulation 3.1.5 (2) of these Regulations not exceeding 0.08 per cent.

3.1.6: Emulsifying and Stabilising agents

1) Emulsifying agents’ and "stabilising agents" means substances which when added to food, are capable of
facilitating a uniform dispersion of oils and fats in aqueous media or vice versa, and/or stabilising such emulsions
and include the agents specified below and in Chapter 2 and Appendix A of these regulaitons:

Agar, alginic acid, calcium and sodium alginates, carrageen, edible gums (such as guar, karaya, arabic, carobean,
furcellaran, tragacanth, gum ghatti), dextrin, sorbitol, pectin, sodium and calcium pectate, sodium citrate, sodium
phosphates, sodium tartrate, calcium lactate, lecithin, albumen, gelatin, quillaia, modified starches, hydrolysed
proteins, monoglycerides or diglycerides of fatty acids, synthetic lecithin, propyleneglycol stearate, propylenegelycol
alginate, methyl ethyl cellulose, methyl cellulose, sodium carboxy-methyl cellulose, stearyl tartaric acid, esters of
monoglycerides and diglycerides of fatty acids monostearin sodium sulphoacetate, sorbitan esters of fatty acids or
in combination [poly-oxy-ethylene sorbitan, monostearate] sodium stearoyl-2-lactylate and calcium stearoyl-2-
lactylate Polyglycerol Esters of fatty acids and polyglycerol Ester of interesterified Ricinoleic acid and Glycerol
esters of wood rosins (Ester Gum)


[art II—avys 4] FRA AT USTIA + STH 429

2) Restriction on use of emulsifying and stabilizing agents - No emulsifying or stabilising agents shall be used
in any food, except where the use of emulsifying or stabilising agent is specifically permitted :

Provided that the following emulsifying or stabilising agents shall not be used in milk and cream, namely:

Monoglycerides or diglycerides of fatty acids, synthetic lecithin, propyl-eneglycol stearate, propyleneglycol
alginate, methyl ethyl cellulose, methylcellulose, sodium carboxymethyl cellulose, stearyl tartaric acid, esters of
monoglycerides and diglycerides of fatty acids, monostearin sodium sulphoacetate, sorbitan esters of fatty acids or
in combination

Provided further that Polyglycerol esters of fatty acids and Polyglycerol ester of interesterified Ricinoleic acid
may be used in bakery products and in chocolate to the extent of 0.2 per cent by weight.

Provdied that Diacetyl Tartaric acid esters of Mono and Diglycerides may be used in Bread and Cakes.

3) Use of starch phosphate - Starch phosphate, a gum arabic substitute, may be used in syrup, ice-cream
powder, salad dressing and pudding to a maximum extent of 0.5 per cent.

4) Use of modified starches - Modified food starches (derivative starches) may be used in confectionery,
flavours, dairy products (where use of emulsifier/stabiliser is allowed in Appendix A and Chapter 2. glazes, icings,
gravies, sauces, soups, coatings upto a maximum concentration of 0.5 per cent by weight.

Provided that modified food starches (derivative starches) may be used in snacks, frozen potato products,
baked foods, and salad dressing/mayonnaise, upto a maximum concentration of 5 percent by weight.

5) Use of emulsifying and stabilising agents in flavouring agents - The emulsifying and stablising agents may
be added to flavouring agents.

6) Use of emulsifying and stabilising agents in fruit products - The following emulsifying and stabilising
agents may be added to Fruit Products:

a. Pectin

b. Sodium alginate

c. Calcium alginate

d. Alginic acid

e. Propylene glycol alginate.

7) Use of emulsifying and stabilising agents in frozen desserts - The emulsifying and stabilizing agents as
defined under the Regulation 3.1.6 (1), may be added to frozen desserts.

8) Use of Hydroxypropyl Methyl Cellulose in various foods

Hydroxypropyl Methyl Cellulose may be used in the following food products, not exceeding the maximum
levels mentioned in column 3 of the table given below

SINo_ Article of food Maximum level
(i) Non dairy whip topping 2.0%
(ii) Snacks, savouries, luncheon meat and poultry products, instant mixes such as idli mix, 1.0%

(iit)

dosa mix, upma mix, pongal mix, puliyogore mix, gulab jamun mix, jalebi mix, vada mix, etc,
salad dressing/mayonnaise, mixes for gravies, ice cream, frozen desserts, puddings
and custards

Mixes for dairy based drinks 0.5%
9) Use of Xanthan gum.-Xanthan gum may be used in the following products, namely :—
Non dairy whip toppings maximum 0.5% by weight
Bakery mixes maximum 0.5% by weight

10) use of acid treated starch in sugar confectionery: Acid treated starch may be used in sugar confectionery
on GMP basis


430

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

3.1.7: Anticaking Agents
1) Restriction on use of anticaking agents.

No anticaking agents shall be used in any food except where the use of anticaking agents is specifically
permitted.

Provided that table salt, onion powder, garlic powder, fruit powder and soup powder may contain the following
anticaking agents in quantities not exceeding 2.0 per cent either singly or in combination namely :—

a. carbonates of calcium and magnesium.

b. phosphates of calcium and magnesium .

c. silicates of calctum, magnesium, aluminium or sodium or silicon dioxide;

d. myristates, palmitates or stearates of aluminium ammonium, calcium, potassium or sodium.

Provided that that calctum potassium or sodium ferrocyanide may be used as crystal modifiers and anti-caking
agent in common salt, iodised salt and iron fortified salt in quantity not exceeding 10 mg/kg singly or in combination
expressed as ferrocyanide.

3.1.8: Antifoaming agents in edible oils and fats.

1) Dimethyl Polysiloxane, food grade, may be used as an antifoaming agent in edible oils and fats for deep fat
frying upto a maximum limit of 10 parts per million.

Provided that mono and diglycerides of fatty acids of edible oil may be used as antifoaming agent in jam, jellies
and marmalade

Explanation-For the purpose of this Regulation,"Anti foaming agent" means substance which retards
deteriorative changes and foaming height during heating.

3.1.9: Use of release agents in confectionery.

1) Spreadasil silicon spray (Dimethyl Polysiloxane) if used, as release agent in confectionery, shall not exceed
10 ppm of the finished product.

3.1.10: FLAVOURING AGENTSAND RELATED SUBSTANCES
1) Flavouring agents:

Flavouring agents include flavour substances, flavour extracts or flavour preparations, which are capable of
imparting flavouring properties, namely taste or odour or both to food. Flavouring agents may be of following three
types :—

(i) Natural Flavours and Natural Flavouring substances means flavour preparations and single substance
respectively, acceptable for human consumption, obtained exclusively by physical processes from vegetables,
for human consumption

(ii) Nature-Identical Flavouring Substances means substances chemically isolated from aromatic raw
materials or obtained synthetically; they are chemically identical to substances present in natural products
intended for human consumption, either processed or not.

(iii) Artificial Flavouring Substances means those substances which have not been identified in natural
products intended for human consumption either processed or not;

2) Use of anti-oxidants, emulsifying and stabilising agents and food preservatives in flavour.

The flavouring agents may contain permitted anti-oxidants, emulsifying and stabilising agents and food
preservatives.

3) Use of Anticaking agent in flavours: Synthetic Amorphous Silicon Dioxide may be used in powder flavouring
substances to a maximum level of 2 percent

4) Restriction on use of flavouring agents :—
The use of the following flavouring agents are prohibited in any article of food, namely :—

(i) Coumarin and dihydrocoumarin;


[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 431

(ii) Tonkabean (Dipteryl adorat);

(iii) B-asarone and cinamy] anthracilate".
(iv) Estragole

(v) Ethyl Methyl Ketone

(vi) Ethyl-3-Phenylglycidate

(vii) Eugenyl methyl ether

(viii) Methyl B napthyl Ketone

(ix) P.Propylanisole

(x) Saffrole and Isosaffrole

(xi) Thujone and Isothujone o & B thujone.
5) Solvent in flavour.

Diethylene Glycol and Monoethyl ether shall not be used as solvent in flavours.

3.1.11: Use of Flavour Enhancers
1) Monosodium Glutamate -

Monosodium Glutamate may be added to foods as per the provisions contained in Appendix A, subject to
Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) level and under proper label declaration as provided in Regulation 2.4.5 (18)
of Food Safety and Standards (Packaging and Labeling) Regulations, 2011. It shall not be added to any food for use
by infant below twelve months and in the following foods:—

List of foods where Monosodium Glutamate is not allowed
(i) Milk and Milk Products including Buttermilk.
(ii) Fermented and renneted milk products (plain) excluding dairy based drink.
(iii) Pasteurized cream.
(iv) Sterilised, UHT, whipping or whipped and reduced fat creams.
(v) Fats and Oils, Foodgrains, Pulses, Oil seeds and grounded/ powdered foodgrains.
(vi) Butter and concentrated butter.
(vii) Fresh fruit.
(viii) Surface treated fruit.
(ix) Peeled or cut fruit.
(x) Fresh vegetables, Surface treated fruit, Peeled or cut fruits.
(xi) Frozen vegetables.
(xii) Whole, broken or flaked grains, including rice.
(xiii) Flours of cereals, pulses and starches.
(xiv) Pastas and noodles (only dried products).
(xv) Fresh meat, poultry and game, whole pieces or cuts or comminuted.
(xvi) Fresh fish and fish products, including mollusks, crustaceans and echinoderms.
(xvii) Processed fish and fish products, including mollusks, crustaceans and echinoderms.

(xviii) Fresh eggs, Liquid egg products, Frozen egg products.


432 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

(xix) White and semi-white sugar (sucrose and saccharose, fructose, glucose (dextrose), xylose, sugar
solutions and syrups, also (partially) inverted sugars, including molasses, treacle and sugar toppings.

(xx) Other sugars and syrups (e.g. brown sugar and maple syrup).
(xxi) Honey
(xxii) Salt

(xxiii) Herbs, spices and condiments, seasoning (including salt substitutes) except seasoning for Noodles
and Pastas, meat tenderizers, onion salt, garlic salt, oriental seasoning mix, topping to sprinkle on rice,
fermented soyabean paste, Yeast.

(xxiv) Infant food and Infant milk substitute including infant formulae and follow-on formulate.
(xxv) Foods for young children (weaning foods).

(xxvi) Natural Minerals water and Packaged Drinking water.

(xxvii) Concentrates (liquid and solid) for fruit juices.

(xxviii) Canned or bottled (pasteurized) fruit nectar.

(xxix) Concentrates (liquid and solid) for fruit juices.

(xxx) Canned or Bottled (pasteurized) fruit nectar.

(xxxi) Coffee and coffee substitutes, tea, herbal infusions, and other cereal beverages excluding cocoa.
(xxxii) Wines,

(xxxiii) Margarine

(xxxiv) Fat Spread

(xxxv) Fruits and Vegetables products except those where Monosodium Glutamate is permitted under
Appendix A of these Regulations.

(xxxvi) Carbonated Water

(xxxvil) Baking Powder

(xxxvili) Arrowroot

(xxxix) Sago

(xl) Plantation Sugar, Jaggery and Bura.

(xli) Ice-Candies.

(xlii) Ice cream and Frozen desserts.

(xliit) Cocoa Butter

(xliv) Saccharine

(xlv) Malted Milk Food and Milk based foods
(xlvi) Bread

(xlvii) Vinegar

(xlviii) Sugar Confectionery, Toffee, Lozenges.
(xlix) Chocolate

(1) Pan Masala

(li) Alcoholic Beverages.

3.1.12: SEQUESTERING AND BUFFERING AGENTS (ACIDS, BASES, AND SALTS)

(i) "Sequestering agents" means substances which prevent adverse effect of metals catalysing the oxidative
break-down of foods forming chelates; thus inhibiting decolourisation, off taste and rancidity;

(ii) "Buffering agents" means materials used to counter acidic and alkaline changes during storage or
processing steps, thus improving the flavour and increasing the stability of foods;


[art II—ars 4]

ART AT USI 2 SATS

433

1) Restrictions on the use of sequestering and buffering agents.

Unless otherwise provided in these regulations the sequestering and buffering agents specified in column (1)
of the Table below, may be used in the groups of food specified in the corresponding entry in column (2) of the said
Table, in concentration not exceeding the proportions specified in the corresponding entry in column (3) of the said

Table :
TABLE
SL Name of sequestering And Groups of food Maximum level
No. buffering agents of use (parts
per Million)
(ppm) (mg./
kg.)
(1) (2) G3) (4)
1. Acetic Acid (i) Acidulant, buffering and neutralizing agents in beverages soft drinks
Limited by
GMP.
(ii) in canned baby foods 5,000
2. Adipic acid Salt substitute and dietary food 250
3. Calcium Gluconate In confections 2,500
4. Calcium Carbonate As aneutralizer in number of foods 10,000
5. Calcium oxide As aneutralizer in specified dairy product 2,500
6. Citric acid malic acid Carbonated beverage and as an acidulant in Limited by
miscellaneous foods GMLP.
7.  DLLactic Acid (food grade) As acidulant in miscellaneous foods Limited by
GMP.
8. L(G) Lactic Acid (food grade) As acidulant in miscellaneous foods Limited by
GMP
9, Phosphoric acid Beverages, soft drinks 600
10. Polyphosphate containing (a) Processed cheese, bread 40,000
less than 6 Phosphate moieties (b) Milk Preparations 4,000
(c) Cake Mixes 10,000
(d) Protein foods 4,000
11. L@)Tartaric acid Acidulants 600
12. Calcium Disodium, Ethylene, (i) Emulsions containing refined vegetable oils, 50
Diamine tetra acetate eggs, vinegar, salt, sugar and spices;
(ii) Salad dressing;
(iii) Sandwich spread or fat Spread
13. Fumaric acid As acidulant in Miscellaneous foods 3000ppm

NOTE :- DL Lactic acid and L(+) Tartaric acid shall not be added to any food meant for children below 12
months (The lactic acid shall also conform to the specification laid down by the Indian Standards Institution.)

3.1.13: Use of Glycerol Esters of Wood Resins (Ester Gum)—

The maximum limit of glycerol esters of wood resins(ester gum) when used in flavour emulsions, soft drink
concentrate and carbonated water shall not exceed 100 ppm. of the final beverage for consumption.

3.1.14: Use of Sucrose Acetate Isobutyrate - The maximum concentration of Sucrose Acetate Isobutyrate when used
in non-alcoholic beverages as a clouding agent shall not exceed 300 ppm;


434

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

3.1.15: Use of Lactulose Syrup in foods:

1) Lactulose syrup may be used in special milk based infant food formulations, which is to be taken under
medical advice upto a maximum level of 0.5 per cent of final food subject to label declaration.

2) Lactulose syrup may be used in bakery products upto 0.5 per cent maximum by weight.

3.1.16: Use of Dimethyl Dicarbonate:

Dimethyl Dicarbonate may be used in fruit drinks, ready to drink tea beverages, isotonic/sports drinks and
flavoured water upto 250 mg/litre subject to a maximum methanol content in final product as 200 mg/litre

3.1.17: Other substances to be used in Specified limits

The use of substances specified in column (2) in the food mentioned in column (3) of the Table given below
shall not exceed the limit specified in column (4) of the said table, namely :—

TABLE
S.No. Substances Food Maximum level
of use (ppm)
mg/kg
1 2 3 4
1. Ammonium Carbonate Baked food confections 5,000
2. Ammonium bicarbonate -do- GMP
3. Baking powder Baked foods GMP
4. | Ammonium Phosphate Bread 2,500
Monobasic
5. Ammonium persulphate -do- 2,500
6. Calcium Phosphate -do- 2,500
7. Calcium Carbonate -do- 5,000
8. Potasstum Bromate and /or -do- 50
Potassium Iodate
9. Ammonium Chloride -do- 500
10. Fungal Alpha-amylase -do- 100
11. Sodium Stearoyl-2 Lactylate or -do- 5,000
Calcium Stearoyl-2 Lactylate
(Singly or in combination)
12. L-Cystein Mono Hydrochloride -do- 90
13. Benzoyl Peroxide Flour for bakery 40
14. Potassium bromate -do- 20
15. Ascorbic acid -do- 200
16. Gluconodelta Lactone Cured meat or meat products 5,000
17. Chlorine Flour for bakery 2,000
18. Ascorbic acid/Iso Ascorbic acid Corned beef, Luncheon Meat, Cooked Ham, 500
and its salts singly or in combination Chopped Meat, Canned Chicken, Canned Mutton
and Goat Meat.
19. Phosphates (Naturally present Luncheon Meat,Cooked Ham, Chopped Meat. 8000

and added) expressed as P2O05

3.1.18: Carry Over Of Food Additives


[art II—ars 4]

FRA AT USTIA + STH 435

For the purpose of the standards specified in chapter 2 of these regulation the "Carry Over" principle applies
to the presence of additives such as colours, flavouring agents, anti-oxidants anti-caking agents, emulsifying and
stabilising agents, and preservatives in food, as a result of the use of raw material or other ingredients in which these
additives were used. The presence of contaminants is not covered by this purpose.

The presence of an additive in food through the application of the carry over principle is admissible in general
unless otherwise specifically prohibited in the regulations provided the total additive including the carry over
through the raw material or other ingredients does not exceed the maximum amount so permitted.

3.2: Standards of Additives

3.2.1 Food Colours: Standards of various Food Colours with characteristics are specified in the table below:

1 Tartrazine
Common Name

Synonyms

Colour of the 0.1 Per cent

(M/V) solution in distilled water.
Colour Index Number (1975)
Class

Chemical Name

Empirical formula
Molecular Weight
Solubility

General Requirements

Tartrazine

FD and C Yellow No.5, E.E.C. Serial No.E 102, L-Gebb 2, CI.
Food Yellow 4.

Yellow
No 19140
Monoazo.

Trisodium salt of 5-hydroxy-1-p- sulphopheny1-4-(p-
sulphophenylazo) pyrazol-3-carboxylic acid.

Cig Hy Ny Og S2 Nay
534.37
Soluble in water. Sparingly soluble in Ethanol.

The material shall conform to the requirements prescribed in Table below:—

TABLE
Si. No. Characteristic Requirement
1. Total dye content, corrected for Sample dried at 87
105+1°C for 2 hours, per cent by mass, Min.
2. Loss on drying at 135°C and Chlorides and Sulphates expressed as sodium salt, 13
percent by mass, Max.
3. Water insoluble matter, percent by mass, Max. 0.2
4. Combined ether extracts, percent by mass,max 02
5. Subsidiary dyes, percent by mass, Max. 1.0
6. Dye intermediates, percent by mass, Max. 0.5
7. Lead, mg/kg, Max. 10
8. Arsenic, mg/kg, Max. 3
9, Heavy metals, mg/kg, Max. 40

It shall be free from mercury, copper and chromium in any form; aromatic amines, aromatic nitro compounds,

aromatic hydrocarbons, and cyanides.;


436

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

2. SUNSET YELLOW
Common Name

Synonyms

Colour of the 0.1 Percent (M/V) solution in
distilled water
Colour Index Number (1975)

Class

Chemical Name

Empirical formula
Molecular Weight
Solubility

General Requirements

Sunset Yellow

FD and C Yellow No.6, Janus
Orange S, C.l. Food Yelow 3, -Orange
2, Janune soil, EEC Serial No.E.10

Orange

No 15985
Monoazo

Disodium salt of 1.(4-sulphophenylazo) 2-napthol-6-
sulphonic acid

CoH O51 4Nay
452.37

Soluble in water. Sparingly soluble in Ethanol

The material shall conform to the requirements prescribed in Table below:—

TABLE
Requirements for Sunset Yellow, FCF
SI. No. Requirements for Sunset Yellow, FCF Characteristic Requirement
1. Total dye content, corrected for Sample dried at 87
105+1°C for 2 hours, per cent by mass, Min.
2 Loss on drying at 135°C, percent by mass and Chlorides and Sulphates 13
expressed as sodium salt, percent by mass, Max
3. Water insoluble matter, percent by mass, Max. 0.2
4. | Combined ether extracts, percent by mass. Max. 0.2
5. Subsidiary dyes, (lower sulphonated dyes including 3.0
traces of orange II) percent by mass, Max.
6. Dye intermediates, percent by mass, Max. 0.5
7. Lead, mg/kg, Max. 10
8 Arsenic, mg/kg, Max. 3
9, Heavy metals, mg/kg, Max. 40

It shall be free from mercury, copper and chromium in any form; aromatic amines, aromatic nitro compounds,

aromatic hydrocarbons, and cyanides;

3, ERYTHROSINE

Common Name

Synonyms

Colour of the 0.1 Percent (M/V) solution in
distilled water

Colour Index Number (1975)

Class

Chemical Name

Erythrosine
FD and C Red No.3 C.1. Food Red 14, LB-Rot-I
Red

No 45430
Xanthene

Disodium or dipotassium salt of 2',4', 5', 7', tetraiodo-
fluerescein


[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 437

Empirical formula C59 Hg O; 14 Na>-H,O

Molecular Weight 879.87 (Disodium Salt)

Solubility Soluble in water. Sparingly soluble in Ethanol
General Requirements

The material shall conform to the requirements prescribed in Table below:—

TABLE

SI. No. Requirements for Sunset Yellow, FCF Characteristic Requirement
1. Total dye content, corrected for Sample dried at

1050+1°C for 2 hours, per cent by mass, Min. 87
2. Loss on drying at 135°C percent by mass and Chlorides and

Sulphates expressed as sodium salt percent by mass, Max. 13
3. Water insoluble matter, percent by mass, Max. 0.2
4. Ether extractable matter,(alkaline), percent by mass. Max. 02
5. Inorganic Iodide, percent by mass as sodium iodide, Max. 0.1
6. Subsidiary colouring matters except flourescein,

percent by mass, Max. 4
7. Fluorescein, mg/kg, Max. 20
8. Organic compounds other than colouring matter 0.2

(a) Tri-iodoresorcinol, percent by mass, Max. 02

(b) 2.(2,4-dihydroxy-3,5-di-iodobenzoyl) benzoic acid, percent by mass, Max. 02
9, Lead, mg/kg, Max. 10
10. Arsenic, mg/kg, Max. 3
ll. Zinc, mg/kg, Max. 50
12. Heavy metals, mg/kg, Max. 40

It shall be free from mercury, copper and chromium in any form; aromatic amines, aromatic nitro compounds,

aromatic hydrocarbons, and cyanides.

4, INDIGO CARMINE
Common Name Indigo carmine

Synonyms Indigotine, FD and C Blue No.2, Cl Food Blue 1, EEC Serial
No. E132 L-Blue2

Colour of the 0.1 Percent (M/V) solution in Blue

distilled water

Colour Index Number (1975) No 73015

Class Indigoid

Chemical Name Disodium Salt of indigotine-5, 5'-Disulphonic acid
Empirical formula C,¢6HgN, Og S, Na,

Molecular Weight 466.36

Solubility Soluble in water. Sparingly soluble in Ethanol
General Requirements

The material shall conform to the requirements prescribed in Table below:—
TABLE Requirement for Indigo Carmine


438 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

SI. No. Characteristic Requirement
1. Total dye content, corrected for Sample dried at 105+1°C for 2 hours, per cent by mass, Min. 8
2. Loss on drying at 135°C, percent by mass and Chlorides and Sulphates expressed as sodium salt, 15
percent by mass, Max.
3. Water insoluble matter, percent by mass, Max. 0.2
4. | Combined ether extracts, percent by mass. Max. 0.2
5. Subsidiary dyes, percent by mass, Max. 1.0
6. — Isatin Sulphonic acid, percent by mass, Max. 0.5
7. Lead, mg/kg, Max. 10
8 Arsenic, mg/kg, Max. 3
9, Heavy metals, mg/kg, Max. 40

It shall be free from mercury, copper and chromium in any form; aromatic amines, aromatic nitro compounds,
aromatic hydrocarbons, and cyanides.

5, B-CAROTENE.

B-Carotene is obtained as dark violet hexagonal prisms when crystallised from benzene methanol solution; or
as red rhombic, almost quardratic plates, from petroleum ether.

Synonyms C.I. natural yellow 26
Colour Index Number (1956) No.75130

Class Carotenoids
Chemical Name all trans B-Carotene
Empirical formula Cyq Hy56

Molecular Weight 536.89

Melting Point 183°C + 19°C

Solubility.- Soluble in carbon disulphide, benzene and chloroform, moderately soluble in normal hexane,
cyclohexane, ether, petroleum ether and oils; practically insoluble in methanol ; insoluble in water.

Spectrophotometric Requirement.-The wavelengths of absorption maxima of all trans B-Carotene in cyclohexane
(0.2 mg per 100 ml. approximately) and in-1cm cell shall be 456 my to 484 my region. There shall be no cis-peak in the
330 mp to 355 mp region.

A solution of B-carotene in chloroform on addition of antimony trichloride solution shall give a dark blue
colour having maximum absorption at a wavelength of 590 mu.

Colour Reaction- When 2ml. of concentrated sulphuric acid is added to 2ml. of 0.2 per cent solution of B-
Carotene in chloroform, the acid layer shall turn blue.

The material shall have a minimum purity of 96.0 per cent.

Maximum limit of metallic impurities shall be:—

Arsenic (as As) 3 ppm
Lead (as Pb) 10 ppm.
Heavy metal 40 ppm.

And shall also meet the following requirements:—
(@) Subsidiary colouring matter, percent by weight, Max 3
(i) Sulphated ash, percent of total colouring matters, Max 0.1


[art II—ars 4]

FRA AT USTIA + STH 439

6-CHLOROPHYLL:

Chlorophyll, the green pigment of plants, is extracted and widely used as a colouring matter for various food

items.
Synonyms
Colour Index Number (1956)
Colour Index Number (1924)
Color
Class

Chemical Name

Empirical formula

Molecular Weight

CI. Natural Green 3; Lebensmittel Green No.1
No.75810

No. 12499

Green

Phorbin (dihydrophorphin)

Chlorophyll a - magnesium complex of 1,3,5,8-tetramethyl 4-ethyl-
2-vinyl-9-keto-10 carbomethoxy phorbinphytyl-7-propionate.
Chlorophyll b magnesium complex 1,5,8 trimethyl-3-formy1-4-ethyl-
2- vinyl-9-keto-10 carbomethoxyphorbinphytyl-7-propionate

Chlorophyll a - C;,H7.O;N,Mg
Chlorophyll b- C,;Hj,O,.N4Mg
Chlorophyll a- 893.54
Chlorophyll b - 907.52

General- The material shall be an intensely dark green, aqueous, ethanolic, or oily solution of chlorophyll
degradation products. It shall be soluble in ethanol, ether, chloroform and benzene. It shall be insoluble in water.

Identification test- A solution of chlorophyll in ethanol shall be blue with deep red flourescence.

Brown-phase Reaction-When green ether or petroleum ether solution of chlorophyll is treated with a small
quantity of a 10 per cent solution of potassium hydroxide in methanol, the colour shall become brown quickly

returning to green.

Note.- This test is applicable only when chlorophyll has not been treated with alkalies.

Maximum limits for metallic impurities shall be:—

Arsenic (as As) 3 ppm
Lead (as Pb) 10 ppm
Copper (as Cu) 30 ppm
Zinc (as Zn) 50 ppm
The material shall also conform to the following requirements:—
CHLOROPHYLL -MAGNESIUM COMPLEX

SI. No. Characteristic Requirement

1 Total combined phaeophytines and their magnesium complexes, percent by weight, max. 10

2 Residual solvents, mg/kg, Max. Acetone, methanol, ethanol, propan-2-ol, hexane 50

Dichloromethane 10

7-CARAMEL

Caramel shall be prepared from the food grade carbohydrates or their combinations in the presence of food
grade acids, alkalis or salts. It shall be of four types, namely:—

Type-I- Plain Caramel-It shall be prepared by heating carbohydrates with or without acids or alkalis, or their
salts. No. ammonium or sulphite compounds are used.

Type-I-Caustic sulphite caramel- It shall be prepared by heating carbohydrates with or without acids or
alkalis or their salt in the presence of sulphite compounds; no ammonium compounds are used.

Type - III - Ammonia Process Caramel- It shall be prepared by heating carbohydrates with or without acids or
alkalis or their salts in the presence of ammonium compounds; no sulphites are used.


440 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

Type-IV- Ammonia Sulphite Caramel- It shall be prepared by heating carbohydrates with or without acids or
alkalis or their salts in the presence of both sulphite and ammonium compounds.

RAW MATERIALS
1, Carbohydrates - Caramel shall be prepared from the following carbohydrates or their mixtures:—

Sucrose, glucose, fructose, invert sugar, lactose, malt syrup, molasses, starch hydrolysates and fractions
there of and/or polymer thereof.

2. Acids and alkalis- The acids used are sulphuric acid, phosphoric acid, acetic acid, or citric acid and the
alkalis used are sodium, potassium or calcium hydroxide or mixture thereof.

Where the ammonium compounds are used, they are one or more of the following:—
Ammonium hydroxide
Ammonium Carbonate and Bicarbonate
Ammonium phosphate
Ammonium sulphate
Ammonium sulphite, Bisulphite, Metasulphite

Where the sulphite compounds are used, they are one or more of the following:—
Sulphurous acid, Potassium, Sodium or ammonium Sulphite or Bisulphite.

It shall be a dark brown to black liquid or solid materials having the characteristic odour of burnt sugar
and a pleasant, bitter taste. Its solution, when spread in a thin layer on a glass plate should appear
homogeneous, transparent and have reddish-brown colour. It shall be miscible with water. It shall be free from
any other extraneous colouring matter. It may contain permitted emulsifying and stabilising agents.

It shall conform to the requirements prescribed in Table 1 below. All requirements shall be on solids
basis, except metallic impurities.

TABLE 1 - ROUTINE TEST REQUIREMENTS FOR CARAMEL

Sl. Characteristic Type I Type IT Type HIT Type IV
No. Plain CausticSulphite AmmoniaProcess  Sulphite
Ammonia

1. Solid content, per cent by mass 62-77 65-72 53-83 40-75

2. Colour intensity, 0.01-0.12 0.06-0.10 0.08-0.36 0.10-0.60

3. Ammonical nitrogen per cent by mass, max. 0.01 0.01 04 0.5

4. 4-Methylimidazole - - Max.300 Max.1000
mg/kg & mg/kg &
Max.200 Max.250
mg/kg on mg/kg on
equivalent equivalent
colour basis colour basis

5. Lead (as Pb), mg/kg, Max. 5 5 5 5

6. Arsenic(as AS) mg/kg. 3 3 3 3

Note: Requirement of ammoniacal nitrogen is based on a product colour having a minimum colour intensity
prescribed at SI. No. (2) proportionately higher values of ammoniacal nitrogen apply for products of higher colour
intensity.

Type Test
The material shall also conform to the requirements prescribed in Table 2 below.

All requirements shall be on solid basis except metallic impurities.


[art II—ars 4]

ART AT USI 2 SATS

441

TABLE2 -TYPE TEST REQUIREMENTS FOR CARAMEL

SL Characteristic Type I Type IT Type III TypeIV
No. Plain CausticSulphite AmmoniaProcess Sulphite
Ammonia

1. Total sulphur Per cent by mass. Max.03 1.3-2.5 Max.0.3 14-10.0
2. Sulphur dioxide (as SO2) - Max. 0.2% - Max.0.5%
3. Total nitrogen, Per cent by mass Max.0.1 Max.0.2 1.3-6.8 0.5-7.5
4. Heavy metals mg/kg (Max.) 25 25 25 25
5. 2-Acetyl-4- tetra hydroxy butylimidazole (THD-- - Max.40 mg/kg & —

Max. 25 mg/kg on

an equivalent

colour basis
6. Mercury (as Hg) mg/kg, Max. 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
7. Copper (as Cu) mg/kg, Max. 20 20 20 20

The material shall be filled in amber coloured glass or high density polythylene containers or any other well
closed suitable containers with as little air space as possible. The containers shall be such as to preclude contamination

of the contents with metals or other impurities.

8. ANNATTO

Class Carotenoids

Code Number C1 (1975) No. 75120,
C1 (1975) Natural Orange 4 EEC No.E-160b

Chemical Name Annatto extract in oil contains several coloured components, the
major single one being bixin which may be present in both Cis and
Trans forms. Thermal degradation products of bixin may also be
present

Solubility Water soluble annatto contains norbixin, the hydrolysis product of
bixin, in the form of sodium or potassium salt, as the major colouring
principle. Both cis and trans forms may be present

Chemical Formula Bixin C,,; H39 O04
Norbixin Cy, H5. O4

Molecular Weight Bixin 394.50
Norbixin 380.48

The material shall be of the following two types:
(a) Solution in oil for use in butter and other food products, and

(b) Solution in water for use in cheese and other food products.

General

The material shall be derived only from the plant Bixa orellana L. and shall not contain any extraneous
colouring matter. It shall be processed, packed, stored and distributed under hygienic conditions in licensed

premises.

(1) Solution of Annatto Colour in Oil for Use in Butter and Other Food Products:—

Annatto extract in oil, as solution or suspension, is prepared by extraction of the outer coating of seeds with
vegetable oils. In the preparation of the solution of annatto colour in oil, only the edible vegetable oils shall be used,

either singly or in a mixture.


442 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]
The solution of annatto colour in oils shall be clear and shall remain so on storage in suitable containers at
15°C except for a slight deposit of stearine or shall be in the form of a suspension. The suspension on dilution with
hot oil to bring the bixin content to 0.24 per cent shall be a clear solution.
Colour
The colour of solution in amyl acetate at a dilution of 1:1000 (m/v) when measured in a Lovibond Tintometer
with a 1 cm Cell Spectrophotometrically/Calorimeterically shall be not less than the following:
Yellow units 5.0
Red units 04
or be not less than the colour of the following inorganic solution at a liquid depth of one centimeter which may be
employed for matching the stated dilution in a plunger type colorimeter using incident light closely approximating
the normal day light:
Potassium Bichromate 0.320 g
Cobalt ammonium sulphate
(CoSO, (NH). SO, 6H,O) 2.02 g
Sulphuric acid, Sp-gr 1.84 2ml
Distilled water To make solution to one litre
These reagents shall be of the analytical reagent grade. Although the solution retains its tinctorial value for a
considerable time, after prolonged storage, its optical clarity shall be examined before use, to ensure that no
alteration has taken place.
Note | - Diluted solution of annatto colour in amy] acetate is not stable in colour quality, particularly if exposed
to light, and measurement shall be carried out on the diluted solution without undue delay.
(ii) Solution of Annatto Colour in Water for use in Cheese and Other Food Products:
Water soluble annatto colour is prepared by extraction of the outer coating of the seeds with aqueous alkali
(sodium or potassium hydroxide). In the preparation of the solution, potable water shall be used. A little quantity (0.5
to 3 per cent) of alkali may be added.
The solution shall be clear and shall remain so on storage in suitable containers at a temperature of 15°C.
Colour
The colour of the solution in 0.1 N sodium hydroxide or potassium hydroxide at a dilution of 1:1000 (m/v)
measured in a 1-cm shall be the same as that specified in (i) above.
The material shall conform to the requirements prescribed in Table below:
TABLE
Requirement for Annatto
Si. No. Characteristic Requirement
1. Carotenoid
(a) Annatto extract in oil, expressed as bixin, per cent by mass, Min. 0.24
(b) Water-soluble annatto, expressed as norbixin, percent by mass, Min. 0.24
2. Arsenic, mg/kg, Max. 3
3. Lead, mg/kg, Max. 10
4. Copper, mg/kg, Max. 30
5. | Heavy metal, mg/kg, Max. 40
9-RIBOFLAVIN

Riboflavin is a yellow to orange-yellow crystalline powder. Melting point about 280°C with decomposition.

Solubility-slightly soluble in water, more soluble in saline solution and in a 10 per cent (w/v) solution of urea,
sparingly soluble in alcohol, practically insoluble in chloroform and in solvent ether and soluble in dilute solution
of alkali hydroxides.


[art II—avys 4] FRA AT USTIA + STH 443

Synonyms Vitamin B2, Lactoflavin and Lactroflavine
Color Yellow to orange-yellow

Class Isoalloxazine

Chemical Name 6.7-dimethyl-9-(d-1-ribityl)- isoalloxazine
Empirical formula C1 7H29N4O¢

Molecular Weight 376.38

Identification.-A solution of 1 mg of Riboflavin in 100 ml water is pale greenish yellow in transmitted light, and
has an intense yellowish green flourescence which disappears on the addition of sodium dithionite and mineral
acids or alkalies.

Spectrophotometry-Absorption maxima of aqueous solution shall be at 220 to 225, 266, 371 and 444 mu.

Specific Rotation-It shall be determined in a 0.5 per cent w/v solution in a mixture of 1.5 ml of 0.1 N alcoholic
solution of potassium hydroxide (free from carbonate) and sufficient freshly boiled and cooled water to produce 10
ml. The specific rotation, when calculated with reference to the substance dried to constant weight in the dark at
105°C, shall be,- 122°C.

The material shall have minimum purity of 97.0 per cent.

Maximum limit of metallic impurities shall be:-—

Arsenic (as As) 5 ppm
Lead (as Pb) 20 ppm.
10-PONCEAU 4R
Common Name Ponceau 4R
Synonyms Cl Food Red 7, L-Rot No.4, Coccine Nouvelle, Cochineal Red
A; EEC Serial No.E 124
Colour of the 0.1 Percent (m/v) solution Red
in distilled water
Colour Index Number (1975) No. 16255
Class Monoazo
Chemical Name Trisodium salt of 1-(4-sulpho-1-naphtylazo) naphthol-6, 8-
disulphonic acid
Empirical formula C59 Hy Nz O19 $83 Nay
Molecular Weight 604.5
Solubility Soluble in water. Sparingly soluble in Ethanol

The material shall conform to the requirements prescribed in Table below:—
TABLE

Requirements for Ponceau 4R

SL. No. Characteristic Requirement
1. Total dye content, corrected for Sample dried
at 10541°C for 2 hours, per cent by mass, Min. 8
2 Loss on drying at 135°C, percent by mass, Max. and Chlorides and Sulphates 18
expressed as sodium salt, per cent by mass, Max
3. Water insoluble matter, percent by mass, Max. 0.2
4. | Combined ether extracts, percent by mass. Max. 0.2
5. Subsidiary dyes, percent by mass, Max. 1.0
6. Dye intermediates, per cent by mass, Max. 0.5
7. Lead, mg/kg, Max. 10
8 Arsenic, mg/kg, Max. 3
9, Heavy metals, mg/kg, Max. 40



444 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

It shall be free from mercury, selentum and chromium in any form; aromatic amines, aromatic nitro compounds,
aromatic hydrocarbons, and cyanides.;

11-CARMOISINE

Common Name Carmoisine

Synonyms Azorubine, C.I. Food Red 3, EEC. Serial No.E 122

Colour of the 0.1 Percent (M/V) solution in Red

distilled water

Colour Index Number (1956) No.14720

Class Monoazo

Chemical Name Disodium salt of 2-(4-sulpho-1-naphthylazo)-1-hydroxy-
naphthalene-4-sulphonic acid

Empirical formula C, 9H,2N,078,Na,

Molecular Weight 502. 44

General Requirements: The material shall be free from mercury, selenium and chromium in any form, aromatic
amines, aromatic nitro compounds, aromatic hydrocarbons and cyanides.

Carmoisine shall also comply with requirements prescribed in Table below:—

TABLE
Requirements for Carmoisine
SI. No. Characteristic Requirement
1. Total dye content, corrected for Sample dried
at 10541°C for 2 hours, per cent by mass, Min. 87
2 Loss on drying at 135°C, percent by mass, Max. and Chlorides and Sulphates 13
expressed as sodium salt, per cent by mass, Max.
3. Water insoluble matter, percent by mass, Max. 0.2
4. | Combined ether extracts, percent by mass. Max. 0.2
5. Subsidiary dyes, percent by mass, Max. 1.0
6. Dye intermediates, per cent by mass, Max. 0.5
7. Lead, mg/kg, Max. 10
8 Arsenic, mg/kg, Max. 3
9, Heavy metals, mg/kg, Max. 40
12-SYNTHETIC FOOD COLOUR - PREPARATION AND MIXTURES.

Colour Preparation

A Preparation containing one or more of the permitted synthetic food colours conforming to the prescribed
standard alongwith diluents and/or filler materials and meant to be used for imparting colour to food. It may contain
permitted preservatives and stabilizers.

The colour preparation would be either in the form of a liquid or powder. Powder preparations shall be
reasonably free from lumps and any visible extraneous/foreign matter. Liquid preparations shall be free from sediments.

Only the following diluents or filler materials shall be permitted to be used in colour preparations conforming
to the prescribed standards:—

1. Potable water

2 Edible common salt
3, Sugar
4 Dextrose Monohydrate


[art II—ars 4]

ART AT USI 2 SATS

445

5. Liquid glucose

6. Sodium sulphate

7. Tartaric acid

8. Glycerine

9. Propylene glycol

10. Acetic acid, dilute

11. Sorbitol

12. Citric acid

13. Sodium carbonate and sodium hydrogen carbonate
14. Lactose

15. Ammonium, sodium and potassium alginates
16. Dextrins

17. Ethyl acetate

18. Starches

19. Diethyl ether

20. Ethanol

21. Glycerol mono, di and tri acetate
22. Edible oils and fats

23. Isopropyl alcohol

24. Beeswax

25. Sodium and ammonium hydroxide
26. Lactic acid

27. Carragenan and gum arabic

28. Gelatin

29. Pectin

Colour Mixtures

A mixture of two or more permitted synthetic food colour conforming to prescribed standards without diluents

and filler material and meant to be used for imparting colour to food.

It may contain permitted preservatives and stabilizers.

General Requirements-For Colour Preparation & Colour Mixture. The total Synthetic dye content, per cent by
mass (m/v) in the colour preparation or in the mixture shall be declared on the label of the container. In powder
preparations the declared value shall be on moisture free basis and in case of liquid preparations on as in basis. The

total dye content shall be within the tolerance limits given below on the declared value:

The limits of impurities shall be as prescribed in Table below:—

(a) Liquid preparation +15 per cent

(b) Solid preparations +7,5 per cent

TABLE

Limits for Impurities

-5 per cent

WN

Water insoluble matter, per cent by mass, Max. (on dry basis), Max.
Lead, (as Pb), mg/kg, Max.
Arsenic, (as As) mg/kg, Max.

Heavy metals, mg/kg, Max.

1.0
10
3.0



446

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY

[Part III—Sec. 4]

It shall be free from mercury, copper and chromium in any form; aromatic amines, aromatic nitro compounds,
aromatic hydrocarbons, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon, 2-naphthyl aminobenzidine, amino-4-diphenyl (xenylamine)

or their derivatives and cyanides.

The total coal tar dye content percent by mass (m/v) in colour preparation or in mixture shall be declared on the
lable of the container. In powder preparation, the declared value shall be on moisture free basis and in case of liquid
preparation on ' as is basis' and the total dye content shall within + 15 percent of the declared value. Colour
preparation and colour mixture shall also comply with the following requirements namely: -

Sl. No. Characteristics

Requirements

Water insoluble matter, percent by mass
Arsenic as (As), parts per million

Lead as (Pb) parts per million

Not more than 1.0
Not more than 3

Not more than 10

13 BRILLIANT BLUE FCF

Brilliant Blue FCF is hydroscopic in nature and its shade changes with different pH. Suitable precautions

should, therefore, be taken in packing the colour.

Colour Brilliant Blue FCF is described below, namely:—

Common Name Brilliant Blue FCF

Synonyms Cl. Food Blue FD and C Blue No.1 Blue brilliant FCF

Colour Blue

Colour Index Number (1975) No.42900

Class Triarymethane

Chemical Name Disodium salt of alpha 4-(N- ethylbeta sulfobenzylamino)-

phenyl] alpha [4-(N-ethy1l-3-Sulfonatobenzylimino]cyclohexa-
2, 5-dienylidene] toluene-2-sulfonate

Empirical formula C,7H,4N,Ha,098

Molecular Weight 792.86

General requirements: The material shall conform to the requirement prescribed in Table below, namely:—

TABLE FOR BRILLIANT BLUE FCF

SI. No. Characteristics Requirements
(i) Total dye content, corrected for Sample dried at 105+1°C for 2 hours, percent by Mass, Minimum 85
(ii) Loss on drying at 135°C, and Chlorides and Sulphates expressed as sodium salt, per cent by Mass, 15
Maximum
(ii) Water insoluble matter, percent by Mass, Maximum 02
(iv) Combined ether extracts, percent by Mass. Maximum 0.2
(v) Subsidiary dyes, percent by Mass, Maximum 3
(vi) Dye intermediates, percent by Mass, Max.
(a) O, sulpho-benzaldehyde, Maximum 15
(b) N-N' ethyl-benzyl-aniline-3-sulphonic acid, Maximum 0.3
(c) Leuco base, percent by Mass, Maximum 5
(vii) Heavy metals, (as Pb), mg/kg, Maximum 40
Lead, mg/kg, Maximum 10
Arsenic, mg/kg, Maximum 3
Chromium, mg/kg, Maximum 50



[art II—avys 4] FRA AT USTIA + STH 447

Note:- The material shall be free from aromatic amines, aromatic nitro compounds, aromatic hydrocarbons and
cyanides.

14, Fast Green FCF:

Fast Green FCF is hydroscopic in nature and its shade changes with different pH. Suitable precautions
should, therefore, be taken in packing the colour.

Fast Green FCF is described below, namely:—

Common Name Fast Green FCF

Synonyms C.1. Food Green 3, FD and C

Green No.3, Vert Solide FCF

Class Triary methane

Colour Green

Colour Index (1975) No.42053

Chemical Name Disodium salt of 4-[4-(N-ethyl-p-sulfobenzylamino)-phenyl-

(4-hydroxy-2-sulphonumphenyl)-methylene]-(N-ethyl-N-p-
sulphobenzyl 2, 5-cyclohexadienimine).

Empirical Formula C37 H34 O19 Nz 82 Na,
Molecular Weight 808.86

Requirements The material shall conform to the requirement prescribed in Table below, namely:—

TABLE FOR FAST GREEN FCF

Sl. No. Characteristic Requirement

(i) Total dye content, corrected for Sample dried

at 10541°C for 2 hours, percent by mass, Minimum 85
(ii) Loss on drying at 135°C, and, percent by Mass, Maximum and chlorides and Sulphates expressed 13
as sodium salt, percent by mass, Maximum
(ii) Water insoluble matter, percent by Mass, Maximum 02
(iv) Combined ether extracts, percent by Mass. Max 0.2
(v) Subsidiary dyes, percent by mass, Maximum 1.0

(vi) Organic compound other than colouring matter uncombined intermediates and products of
side reactions

(a) Sum of 2-, 3-, 4-formyl benzene sulphonic acid, sodium salts, percent by Mass, Maximum 0.5

(b) Sum of 3- and 4-[ethyl (4-sulfophenyl) amino methyl benzene sulphonic acid, disodium salts,

Percent by Mass, Maximum 03

(c) 2-formyl-5-hydroxybenzene sulphonic acid sodium salt, percent by Mass, Maximum 05

(d) Leuco base, percent by Mass, Maximum 5.0

(e) Unsulphonated primary aromatic amines (calculated as aniline), percent by Mass, Maximum 0.01
(vii) Lead, mg/kg, Maximum 10
(viii) Arsenic, mg/kg, Maximum 3
(x) Chromium, mg/kg, Maximum 50
(x) Mercury, mg/kg, Maximum Absent
(xi) Heavy metals, mg/kg, Maximum 40

Note:- The material shall be free from aromatic nitro compounds, aromatic hydrocarbons and cyanides


448

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

15. Aluminium Lake of Sunset Yellow FCF Food Yellow No.5 Aluminium Lake is a fine orange yellow water
soluble, odourless powder. It is prepared by percipating Sunset Yellow FCF (conforming to specification under 10,02
of Appendix C of these Regulations on to a substratum of Alumina.

Chemical Name - Sunset Yellow FCF Aluminium Lake -6, hydroxy-5 (4-sulfophenlyazo)-2 Naphthalenesulphonic
acid, Aluminium Lake.

Synonym - CI Pigment Yellow, 104, FD and C Yellow No. 6, Aluminium Lake (USA), Food Yellow No. 5
Aluminium Lake (Japan).

(1) Sunset yellow dye used in preparation of lake colour shall conform to specifications laid down under table
2 of these Regulations.

(2) Pure dye content of Aluminium Lake weight by weight not less than 17 percent
(3)  Substratum of Aluminium oxide not more than 83 percent.
(4) Aluminium content in the lake weight by weight not more than 44 percent
(5) Sodium chlorides and sulphates (as sodium salts) not more than 2.0 percent
(6) Inorganic matter (HCl insoluble) not more than 0.5 percent
(7) Lead (as Pb) not more than 10 ppm

(8) Arsenic (as As) not more than 3 ppm

Alumina used in colour shall conform to following, namely:—

(a) Identity: Alumina (dried as aluminium hydroxide) is a white, odourless, tasteless, amorphous powder
consisting essentially of Aluminium hydroxide (Al,O3 x H,O).

(b) Specifications: Alumina (dried aluminium hydroxide) shall conform to the following specifications,

namely:-

() Acidity or alkalinity Agitate 1 gm with 25ml of water and filter.
The filtrate shall be neutral to litmus paper

(i) Lead (as Pb) not more than 10 parts per million

(ii) Arsenic (as As)

not more than 1 parts per million

(iv) Mercury (as Hg) not more than | parts per million
(v) Aluminium oxide (A),03) not less than 50 percent

Solubility: Lakes are insoluble in most solvents. They are also insoluble in water in pH range from 3.5-9.0 but
outside this range and lake substrate tends to dissolve releasing the captive dye.


[art II—ars 4]

ART AT USI 2 SATS

449

Appendix A: List of Food Additives

Use of Food Additives in Food Products: Food products may contain additives as specified in the Regulations and in
the following tables

Table 1

List of food additives for use in bread and biscuits

Sl.No. Name of additive Bread Biscuits
1 2 3 4
A. Acidity regulators
1 Sodium fumarate GMP GMP
2 Potassium malate GMP GMP
3 Sodium hydroxide GMP GMP
4 Acetic acid or Lactic acid 2500 ppm max GMP
5 Citric acid - GMP
6 Malic acid - GMP
7 Tartaric acid - GMP
B. Emulsifying and stabilizing agents singly or in - Emulsifying and stabilizing
combination agents listed in regulation
3.1.6 suitable for this
product may be used.
1 Sucroglycerides - 1000 ppm max
2 Hydroxy Propyl methyl cellulose GMP GMP
3 Sucrose esters of fatty acids GMP GMP
4 Di- Acetyl tartaric acid esters of mono and GMP 10000 ppm max
di- glycerides
5 Guar gum 5000 ppm max —
6 Sorbitol GMP —
7 Lecithin GMP —
8 Glycerine GMP —
9 Glycerol monostearate GMP —
10 Sodium steroyl 2 lactylate of 5000 ppm max —
Calcium steroyl 2 lactylate
(Singly or in combination)
11 Polyglycerol esters of fatty acids and polyglycerol 2000 ppm max —
esters of interesterified recinoleic acid
C. Improver
1 Fungal alpha amylase 100 ppm max (on flour —
mass basis)
2 Bacterial amylase GMP GMP
3 Amylases and other enzymes - GMP
4 Ammonium persulphate 2500 ppm max (on flour —
mass basis)
5 Calcium phosphate 2500 ppm max (on flour —
mass basis)
6 Calcium carbonate 5000 ppm max (on flour —

mass basis)



450 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

1 2 3 4

7 Potassium bromate and/or Potassium iodate 50 ppm max (On flour —
mass basis)

D. Flour treatment agent

1 Ammonium chloride 500 ppm max (on flour —
mass basis)
2 L-cystein mono hydrochloride 90 ppm max (on flour —
mass basis)
3 Ammonium phosphate 2500 ppm max (on flour —
mass basis)
4 Benzoyl peroxide 40 ppm max 40 ppm max
E. Antioxidant - As per regulation 3.1.5
1 Ascorbic acid GMP GMP

F. Preservatives/ Mould inhibitors singly or in combination
1 Calcium or sodium propionate 5000 ppm max —

2 Sorbic acid or its Sodium, Potassium or Calcium salts 1000 ppm max —
(calculated as sorbic acid)

3 Acid calcium phosphate 10000 ppm max —
4 Sodium diacetate 4000 ppm max —
5 Acid sodium pyrophosphate 5000 ppm max —
G Colours (can be used singly or in combination within
the specified limits)
a. Natural
1 Chlorophyll — GMP
2 Caramel — GMP
3 Curcumin or turmeric — GMP
4 Beta carotene — GMP
5 Beta apo-8 carotenal — GMP
6 Methyl ester of Beta apo-8 carotenic acid — GMP
7 Ethyl ester of Beta apo-8 carotenic acid — GMP
8 Canthaxanthin — GMP
9 Riboflavin, Lactoflavin — GMP
10 Annato — GMP
11 Saffron — GMP
b. Synthetic
1 Ponceau 4R — 100 ppm max (singly or in
combination)
2 Carmoisine — -do-
3 Erythrosine — -do-
4 Tartrazine — -do-
5 Sunset Yellow FCF — -do-
6 Indigo carmine — -do-
7 Brilliant blue FCF — -do-
8 Fast green FCF — -do-



[art II—avys 4] URI hl USA : ASAT 451
2 3 4
. Artificial sweeteners (Singly)
1 Aspartame 2200 ppm max 2200 ppm max
2 Acesulphame K 1000 ppm max 1000 ppm max
3 Sucralose 750 ppm max 750 ppm max
Leavening agents
1 Baking powder GMP GMP
2 Ammonium bi-carbonate GMP GMP
3 Ammonium carbonate 5000 ppm max 5000 ppm max
Flavours
1 Natural flavours and natural flavouring
substances/ Nature identical flavouring
substances/ Artificial flavouring substances - GMP
Flavour improver/ enhancer - GMP
Nutrient
1 Calcium and ferrous salts - GMP
2 Potassium iodate - GMP
. Dough conditioners
1 Sodium bisulphite - GMP
2 Sodium metabisulphite - GMP
. Yeast GMP GMP
. Jellifying agents - GMP



[Part III—Sec. 4]

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY

452

Table 2
List of Food Additives for use in Foods

sosuozo7y]

12

srosuodsip roy dnsAs oyoyyuAS

soyejoooyy)

AIQUOIIIJUOD 9dJj IeSNg /poseq 1eSng

wns syqqng /luns Surmoyy

poseq
ddJJOD/eVa], SoBe1oasg 9AINS-0j-Apeay

spedeg poseq sos[ng pure s9ny

‘oqo “xIud epea “xm iqoyel “xr unuoel qein3s
“xrur oreSoArind ‘xr yesuod ‘xr eurdn
“XIU eSOp ‘XIUI I[pI se YONS SoxIUr JURIST

oureu Aue Aq plos sjooMs paseq Jonposd
YIU Jepruns pue epososey ‘unwier qeinyH
“epad ‘Ying eéoyy ‘Iqoyep “oope’] ipuoog
‘yeq o1oskp] ‘eamepy -:(poseq yonpoid
YEA pue poseq soyerpAyoqses) s}aoMs

osueu Aue Aq pyos
sjonpold poly iepruts pue sdiyo euvueq
‘s[ep polly » pooids ‘Ipucoqeieyy
‘oyeqnpey “yowyeq ‘elnyg ‘eparyd
-(s}ONpOIg Pol1y) sormMmoaeg /syoeus

SOATIIPPV

‘ON TS

A Antioxidants

1
2
3

Tocopherol

Lecithin

Butylated hydroxy anisole

250

200 ppm max 200 ppm max

(BHA)

ppm

4 Tertiary butyl hydro quinone 200 ppmmax 200 ppmmax

(TBHQ)

B~ Emulsifier/ Stabiliser

0.5% max

0.5% max

Methyl cellulose

1
2
3

0.5% max

0.5% max

Carboxymethyl cellulose

Gellan gum

(in

sugar

boiled

confec-

tionery
only)

C_ Preservatives

1

300

0.1%
ppm

0.5%

- 1000 ppm

Sorbic acid and its sodium,
potassium and calcium salts

max max

(calculated) as sorbic acid

300 ppm max

2  Benzoicacid

D_ Anticaking agents

1

Not

Carbonates of calcium and

Magnesium

more
than

2.0%



[art WI—ars 4] ART bl STI 3: SATS 453
1 2 3 4 5 6 8 9 10 11 12
max,
singly
or in
combina-
tion
2 Phosphates of calcium and - - - - - - - -
Magnesium
3 Silicates of Calcium, - - - - - - - -
Magnesium, or Sodium
or Silicon dixoide
4  Myristates, palmitates or - - - - - - - -
stearates of aluminium,
ammonium, calcium,
potassium or sodium
E_ Arificial sweeteners (singly)
1 Aspertame - 200 ppmmax  - - 10000 10000 2000 3000 -
ppm ppm ppm ppm
max max max max
2  Acesulphame K - 500 ppmmax - - 5000 3500 500 15000 -
ppm ppm ppm ppm
max max max max
3 Saccharin Sodium - 500 ppmmax - - 3000 3000 500 4500 -
ppm ppm ppm ppm
max max max max
4  Sucralose - 750 ppmmax = - - - - - - 1500
ppm
max
F _ Polyols (singly or in combination)
1 Sorbitol - GMP - - GMP GMP GMP - GMP
2  Manitol - GMP - - GMP GMP GMP - GMP
3 Xylitol - GMP - - GMP GMP GMP - GMP
4 Tsomalt - - - - GMP GMP GMP - GMP
5 Lactitol - - - - GMP GMP GMP - GMP
6 Maltitol - - - - GMP GMP GMP - GMP
G_ Glazing agents
1 Shellac - - - - - - GMP - -
2 Beeswax (white andyellow) - - - - - - GMP - -
3 Candelilla wax - - - - - - GMP - -
4 Gumarabic - - - - - - GMP - -
5 Pectin - - - - - - GMP - -
H_ Bulking agents
1 Polydextrose A and N - - - - - - GMP - -
I Miscellaneous
1 Sodium bicarbonate - - GMP - - - - - -
2 Sodium acetate - - GMP - - - - - -
3 Tartaric acid - - GMP - - - - - -
4 Citric acid - - GMP - - - - - -
5 Malic acid - - GMP - - - - - -



454

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY

[Part III—Sec. 4]

Food Additives

Table 3

in Foods not specified

S. Name of the product Colours Preservatives Emulsifiers/ Flavour Anti- Acid Impro- Anti-
No. Stabilisers enhancers caking regu-  ver/ Oxi-
agents ators lLeave- dants
ning
agents
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
1‘ Desert jelly Carageenan - - - - -
GMP
2 Dairy based drinks, - - Carageenan- —- - - - -
flavoured and/ or Singly-
fermented (e.g GMP
chocolate, milk, Pectin- Singly-
cocoa, eggnog) UHT GMP Mono
sterilized milk shelf diglycerides
life more than three of fatty acids -
months Singly - GMP
lecithin - Singly
GMP sodium
alginate and
calcium alginate-
singly GMP,
Xantham Gum,
singly- GMP,
Microcrystalline
cellulose singly
GMP, Guar
Gum- Singly -
GMP
3 Powdered Soft Drink Titanium Dioxide - - - Sodium - - -
concenterate mix/ 100 ppm maximum, Aluminium
fruit beverage Ponceau 4R. Silicate -
drink carmoisine/ 0.5%
Erythrosine/ maximum
Tartrazine/
Sunset Yellow
FCF/ Indigo
Carmine/ Brilliant
Blue FCF/ fast
green FCF
100 ppm
maximum
4 Soups, Bullions a - - - Di- - - - -
nd Taste Makers Sodium 5
Guanalate
(Di-Sodium
5- Inosinate)-
GMP
5 Custard Powder, Ponceau 4R/ - - - - - - -
Jelly Crystal, carmoisine/
icecandy, Thread, Erythrosine/
Candies, Wafers Tartrazine/Sunset
Yellow FCF/
Indigo Carmine/

Brilliant Blue FCF/



[art I—ave 4] ARG hl USA 3: AST 455
1 2 3 4 5 6 10
fast green FCF-100
ppm maximum
6 Flavour Emulsion, Ponceau BenzoicAcid EdibleGums~ - TBHQ
Flavour Paste (for 4R/carmoisine/ including salt (Arabic and (tertiary
carbonated and non —_Erythrosine/ thereof GMP Gum ghatti), butyl
carbonated water Tartrazine/ glycerols esters hydro
only) Sunset Yellow FCF/ of wood resins quinine
Indigo Carmine/ (ester gum ) - and BHA
Brilliant Blue FCF/ GMP (butylated
fast green FCF hydroxyl
100 ppm maximum anisole) -
as per instructions max
on the label 0.01%
7 ~~ Sausages and - Sulphur dixoide- - - -
Sausage meat 450 ppm max
containing raw meat,
cereals and condiments
8 Corn flourandsuch = - Sulphur dixoide- - - -
like starches 100 ppm max
9 Corn syrup - Sulphur dixoide- - - -
450 ppm max
10 Canned rasgolla - Nisin-5 ppm - - -
(the cans shall be maximum
internally lacquered
with sulphur dioxide
resistant lacquer)
11 Gelatin - Sulphur dixoide- - - -
1000 ppm max
12 Beer - Sulphur dixoide-- - -
70 ppm max
13 Cider - Sulphur dixoide- - - -
200 ppm max
14 Alcoholic wines - Sulphur dixoide- - - -
450 ppm max
15 NonAlcoholic wines - Sulphur dixoide- - - -
350 ppm max
16 Ready-to-serve - Sulphur dixoide- - - -

beverages

17 Brewed ginger beer

18 Coffee extract

19 Danish tinned caviar

20 Dried ginger

21 Flour confectionery

70 ppm max or

Benzoic acid- 120

ppm max

Benzoic acid-
120 ppm max

- Benzoic Acid-

450 ppm maximum

- Benzoic Acid-
50 ppm
maximum

- Sulphur dioxide- -

2000 ppm
maximum

- Sorbic Acid
including
Sodium,
Potasium and



456

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY

[Part III—Sec. 4]

4 5

10

22

23

24

25

26

27

28

29

Smoked fish
(in wrappers)

Dry mix ofrasogollas

Preserved chapatis

fat spread

Prunes

Baked food
confections and
bakes foods

Flour for baked foods

Fruit, fruit pulp

or juice (not dried)
for conversion into
jam or crystallised

Calcium Salt
Calculated as
Sorbic Acid)-
1500 ppm
maximum -
Sorbic Acid- -
only wrapper
may be
impregnated

with

Sorbic Acid
Sulphur dioxide- -
100 ppm
maximum

Sorbic Acid- -
1500 ppm
maximum

Sorbic acid and -
its sodium
potassium and
calcium salts
(calculated as
sorbic acid)-

1000 ppm
maximum or
Benzoic Acid

and its sodium
and potassium
salts (Calculated
as benzoic acid)
or both-1000
ppm maximum

Potassium -
Sorbate
(Calculated as
Sorbic Acid)- 1000
ppm maximum

Ammonia -
Carbonate—
5000ppm
maximum
Ammonium
Bi-carbonate-
GMP, Baking
powder-GMP

Sodium -
Diacetate- 2500
ppm maximum

or Methyl propyl
hydroxy
Benzoate- 500
ppm maximum



[art I—ave 4] ART AT USTITA : ASAT 457
1 2 3 4 5 6 8 9 10
glace or cured fruit
or other products
(a) Cherries - Sulphur dioxide-
2000 ppm
maximum
(b) Strawsberries and - Sulphur dioxide- - - - - -
Raspberries 2000 ppm
maximum
(c) Other fruits - Sulphur dioxide- - - - - -
1000 ppm
maximum—
(d) Dehydrated - Sulphur dioxide- - - - - -
Vegetables 2000 ppm
maximum
30 Paneer - Nisin-12.5 ppm - - - - -

31 Cakes and Pastries

32 Prepacked Coconut
Water

33 Canned Rasogula

maximum
Sorbic Acid

Sucroglycerides -

including Sodium, (only In cakes),

Potassium and
Calcium Salt
(Calculated as
Sorbic Acid)-
1500 ppm
maximum

Nisin-5000 IU
maximum
Nisin-5.0 ppm
maximum

(only In cakes),
Hydroxypropyl
Methyl Cellulose,
Sucrose esters

of fatty acids-
GMP -

Sodium Bacterial -
fumarate, Amylase
Potassium Baking
Malate, Powder,
Sodium Ammo-
hydro- nium
xide —_— bicarbo-
GMP nate-
GMP,
Ammo-
nium
Carbo-
nate-500
ppm
maximum



458

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY

[Part III—Sec. 4]

List of food additives for use in edible oils and fats

Table 4

Name of food additive Tallow Lard Edible vegetable Table margarine/
oils and fats Bakery and
industrial
Margarine/
Fat spread
1 2 3 4 5 6
A Antioxidant (Singly or in combination)
1 Lecithin GMP GMP GMP GMP
2 Ascorbic acid GMP GMP GMP GMP
3. Propyl gallate, ethyl gallate, Octyl gallate, 100 ppm max 100 ppm max 100 ppm max 200 ppm max
Dodecy] gallate or a mixture thereof
4 Butylated Hydroxy Anisole (BHA) 200 ppm max 200 ppmmax 200ppmmax 200 ppm max
Any combination of prop! gallate, BHA within 200 ppm max 200ppmmax 200ppmmax 200 ppm max
limits of gallate and BHA
6 Natural and synthetic tocopherols GMP GMP GMP GMP
Ascorbyl palmitate/ stearate singly or in 500 ppm max 500ppmmax 500ppmmax 500 ppm max
combination
Citric acid, Tartaric acid, Gallic acid GMP GMP GMP GMP
9 Resin guinace 100 ppm max 100ppmmax 100ppmmax 500 ppm max
10 TBHQ 200 ppm max = 200ppmmax 200ppmmax 200 ppm max
B. Antioxidant Synergist
1 = Sodium citrate GMP GMP GMP GMP
2 Isopropyl citrate mixture 100 ppm max, 100ppmmax, 100 ppmmax, 100 ppm max,
Singly or in Singly or in Singly or in Singly or in
combination combination combination combination
3 Phosphoric acid -do- -do- -do- -do-
4 Monoglyceride citrate -do- -do- -do- -do-
C. Antifoaming agents
1 Dimethy!] polysiloxane singly or in combination 10 ppm max 10 ppm max 10 ppm max —
with silicon dioxide
D. Emulsifying agents
1 Mono and di glycerides of fatty acids - - - GMP
2 Mono and di glycerides of fatty acids esterified - - - 10g/kg max
with acetic, acetyl tartric, citric, lactic, tartaric
acids and their sodium and calcium salts
3 Lecithin - - - GMP
4 Polyglycerol esters of fatty acids - - - 5g/kg max
5 1,2- Propylene glycol esters of fatty acids - - - 20g/kg max
6 —Sorbitan monopalmitate/ Sorbitan monostearate/ - - - 10g/kg max
Tristearate
7 Sucrose esters of fatty acids - - - 10g/kg max
E. Preservatives (Singly or in combination)
1 Sorbic acid - - - 1000 mg/kg max:
2  Sodium/ Potassium/ Calcium sorbate expressed as - - - Table maragrine/

Sorbic acid

Fat spread



[art I—ave 4] ARG hl USA 3: AST 459
1 2 6
3 Benzoic acid Table maragrine/
Fat spread
4  Sodium/ Potassium/ benzoate expressed -do-
as Benzoic acid
F. Natural colours
Beta carotene 25 mg/kg max:
Table maragrine/
Fat spread
2 Annatto extracts (as bixin/ norbixin) 20 mg/kg max:
Table maragrine/
Fat spread
3 Curcumin or turmeric (As curcumin) 5 mg/kg max: Table
maragrine/ Fat
spread
4 Beta - apo - 8' - carotenal 25 mg/kg max:
Table maragrine/
Fat spread
5 Methyl and ethyl esters of beta - apo - 8' - 25 mg/kg max:
carotenoic acid
Table maragrine/
Fat spread
G. Acidity regulators
1 Citric acid GMP: Table
maragrine/ Fat
spread
2 ~~ Lacticacid GMP: Table
maragrine/ Fat
spread
3 Sodium and potassium salt of citric and lactic acid GMP: Table
maragrine/ Fat
spread
4 Calcium disodium ethylene diamine tetra acetate 50 mg/kg max:
Table maragrine/
Fat spread
H. Flavours
1 ‘Natural flavours and natural flavouring GMP: Table
substances/ Nature identical flavouring maragrine/ Fat
substances/ Artificial flavouring substances spread
2 Diacetyl 4 mg/kg max:
Table maragrine/

Fat spread



460 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

Table 5
List of Food Additives for use in Fish and Fish Products

Name of the Additive Frozen Frozen Salted Frozen Canned Canned Canned Canned Canned Frozen
shrimps Lobsters Fish finfish finfish Shrimps Sardines Tuna and Crab Fish

Bonito meat Fillets
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11

A Antioxidants

1 Ascorbic Acid GMP - - - - - - - - -

2  Sodiumand - lgm/kg - lgm/kg - - - - - 1 gm/kg
Potassium maximum maximum maximum
Associate singly
or in combination
expressed as
Ascorbic acid

B_  Acidifying Agents

1 = Acetic Acid - - - - GMP - GMP GMP - -

2 Citric acid GMP - - - GMP GMP GMP GMP GMP 1 gm/kg

maximum in
minced fish

flesh only

3. Lactic Acid - - - - GMP - GMP GMP - -

C Moisture Retention Agents singly or in combination including natural phosphate expressed as P.O;

1 Sodium polypho- - - - - - - - 100gms/kg 100gms/kg100gms/kg
sphate expressed as maximummaximummaximum
P,0, expressed expressed expressed

asP,0, asP,O0, as P.O;

2 Potassium Polypho- 10 gms/kg 10 gms/kg - - - (including (including (including
sphate expressed as maximum maximum natural natural natural
P,0, phos- phos- phosphate)

phate) phate)

3. Calcium polypho- - - - - - - - -do- -do- -do-
sphate expressed as
P,05

4  Orthophosphoric acid - - - - - 850 mg/ - - - -

kg
maximum

D Preservatives

1 Potassium bisulphate 100mg/ 100mg/ - - - - - - - -

expressed as sulphur kg kg
dioxide maximum maximum
raw edible raw edible
2. Potassium Sulphite 30mg/ 30mg/—- - - - - - - -
expressed as sulphur kg kg
dioxide maximummaximum

cooked cooked
3. Sodium metabisulphate product. product. - - - - - - - -

expressed as Singly — Singly
sulphur dioxide or in or in
combina- combina-
4. Sodium sulphite tion ex- tion - - - - - - - -
expressed as pressed as product
sulphur dioxide so,
5. Sodium sorbate - - 200 mg/
expressed as sorbic kg
acid maximum

singly or
in combi-



[art II—avys 4] FRA AT USTIA + STH 461

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
nation ex-
pressed as
sorbic acid

6. Calcium sorbate
expressed as sorbic
acid - -

7. Potassium sorbate
expressed as sorbic

acid - - - - - - - - -
8.  Sorbic Acid - - - - - - - - -
E Colours
1 Ponceau 4R 30 mg/kg - - - - - - - - -
maximum
cooked
mass
2. Sunset Yellow - - - - - 30 mg/kg - - - -
maximum
3. Tartarazine singly or
in combi-
nation
F. Thickening Agents
1 Pectin - - - - 2.5 gm/kg- - 2.5 gm/kg- -
maximum- - maximum
2  Tragacanth Gum - - - - - - 20 gm/kg 20 gm/kg - -
maximummaximum
3. Xanthan Gum - - - - - - singly or singly or - -
in combi- in combi-
4. Sodium/ Potassium/ - - - - - - nation in nation in - 5 mg/kg
Calcium Alginate packing packing maximum
medium medium as Sodium
only only Alginate
5. Carboxy Methyl Cellulose - - - - 25 gm/kg- - - -
maximum
G_ Modified Starches
1 = Acid Treated Starch - - - - 60 gm/kg - 60 gm/kg 60 gm/kg - -
maximum maximummaximum
2 Alkali Treated Starch - - - - singly or singly or singly or - -
in combi- in combi- in combi-
3. Balanced starched - - - - nation in nation in nation in - -
packing packing packing
4 Distarch adipate acetylated - - - medium medium medium - -
only - only only

Distarch glycerol - - - - - - -

Distarch glycerol - - - - - - -
acetylated

7 Distarch glycerol, - - - - - - -
hydroxypropyl

Distarch phosphate - - - - - - -

Distarch phosphate, - - - - - - -
acetylated

10 Distarch phosphate - - - - - - -
hydroxypropyl

11 Monostarch phosphate - - - - - - -
12 Oxidized starch - - - - - - -
13 Starch acetate - - - - - - -

14 Starch, hydroxypropyl - - - - - . .



462

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY

[Part III—Sec. 4]

1

10 11

H_ Natural Flavours

1 Natural flavours and
natural flavouring
substances

I Flavour Enhancers

1 Monosodium Glutamate

J Seqgestering Agents

1. Calcium Disodium
EDTA

6 7 8

GMP - GMP

- 250 mg/kg
maximum-

GMP

500 mg/kg -
maximum

250 mg/kg -
maximum



463

SAT

ART AT UIA

[art II—ars 4]

uInut - - - - - —- yewozored g-ode vjog ¢
-TXeUl -  urmur - unur urnur - - - ouojoreo-RI9g =p
urdd -  -1Txeul - -Txeul -1xeul - - -  OFJOULIN) JO WTUMOIN|D €
007 - wurdd - wdd wdd - - - jowrsres ZT
- 007 - 00% 007 - - - TAydor0TyQ
yemyen (®)
SHUNT] polroods of} UTYJIM WOTLUIQUIOD UI Io A[S8UIS posn oq Wed) SINOJOD =- |
UInUr UInU UInu wn wn whut whut wnhu wnhu uNuU uinur =uInur uInur unur = uInur
-IXBUL -IXBUI -IXPUI -IXBUI -IXBUI -IXBUI -IXPUI -IXBUI -IXPUI -IXPUT -IXeUI -IXBUT -TXeUI -IXWUI « -TXBUT
udd udd wdd wdd wdd wdd wdd wdd wdd wdd udd wdd urdd udd wurdd
oss Oss Of OSS OSS OSS OFF OFS OFS OSE - OSs OSS - Oss - - - OSs OSs Ply sIqioosy
jueprxonuy qd
uInur
-TXeUL
urdd - - oUeXOTISTOg
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Ol youd =
sjuosy Surmeojnuy 3
uInur uInur
-TXeUl -TXeUr
urdd urdd
- - - - - - - - - - - Ol - - - - - Ol esomnyyen TAM I
yuosy sulpnojo-luy
dND dND dND dWD dWND dWND dND dAND - - dWD - - dWND dWD - - - - - Ploy ome T FP
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ploy oyeumy ¢
dND dND dND dWND dWD dND dND dND dND dWND dWND dWD dWD dWD dWND dND dND dND dWND dWd PHY OD 7
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ploy one0y OT
(woyeUIquio) ul Io A[8uIg) syueBy BUIAJIPIOY VW
(74 1c 0c 61 81 LI 91 all vi el cl Il Ol 6 8 L 9 s v € (4 I
o =. a 3 =} > Ss o a 5 wv a a =. 2 2 4 wn © 2 2 eas
BG 5 @ = zB 6 8 2 F a Bo os FEF & z % 2 3 $s % o. a5 °
@ 3 a % 5 8 S eo 889 ¢ a g 3 es g So
_ ho} Fe zy x g ° =
3 s <8 e e
o BoE

SJINL posssoo1g AT[VULIAY, I, Ul 9sn IOF SOATJIPPY POO Jo IST]

991981


[Part III—Sec. 4]

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY

464

uInur
-TXeUl
. . . . . . . . W/U %T . - - - - - - - - - SoyoIeig PoyIpoN =|
sjuosy sulmoyoyyL =
- - - - - - - - - - - oydinsrg ume = ¢
- - - - - - - - - - - oyeuoqiey UINTOTeQ ap
uInur
-TXeUl
urdd
- - - - Ose - - - - - - oyeuoonTy unioyeg = €
uInur uInur uInur uInur
-IXBUl -IXBUl -IXBUl -IXBUl
urdd urdd urdd urdd
- Ose - Ose - OSE - - OSE - ayeyoo7yT UINToye) _~
UInUE UU UNU Whur whu whut wnu wunu uInur = uInur wnur = uwnur uInur = UINUT uInur = UINUT
-IXBUI -IXBUI -IXBUI -IXBUI -IXBUI -IXBUI -IXPUI -IXPUT -IXB8UI -IXBUI -IxXBUI -IxeUr -IXBUI -TXPUT -IXBUI -TXPUT
udd wudd wdd wdd wdd wdd wdd wdd udd wudd wdd wdd udd wurdd udd wurdd
Ose Ose ose OSE Ose ose OSE Ose - Ose ose OSE Ose - OSE Ose - OSE Ose SpHoyy urnroyery I
(woyeuIquios ul Io A[sulg) sjwosy Buu =f
- - - JOT WOAH seq =§_-g
- - - AOA ong weyMg L
- - - oulULIeD OSIpuy =o
- - - AOA MOTPPEA Posung
- - - ouIzIeweL op
- - - oulsommjAIq ¢
- - - ouIsIOULIeEQ =
UInUE UU UNU Whur whu whut wnu wunu uInur uInur uInur = UINUT
-IXBUI -IXBUI -IXBUI -IXBUI -IXBUI -IXBUI -IXBUI -IXeUT -IXBUl -IXBUl -IXBUI -TXPUT
udd wudd wdd wdd wdd wdd wdd wdd urdd urdd udd wurdd
00c 00 00 00c 000 000 00¢ 002 007 - 007 - 00% 002 - - - up eoouog =
onoyydg (q)
- - - - - woysyes II
- - - - - oyeuuy OT
- - - - - - UARTLOPRT “UTARTOQRYT 6
- - - - - - ulyuexeyueg 8g
proe
oTUdjOIeD g-ode
- - - - -eyog jo JojsojAT SL
UInUE UU UNU Whur whu whut wnu wunu uInur uInur = UINUT
-IXBUI -IXBUI -IXBUI -IXBUI -IXBUI -IXBUI -IXBUI -IXeUT -IXBUl -IXBUI -TXPUT proe
wdd wdd wdd wdd wdd wdd wdd wdd widd wdd wdd oTuo}oOIed g-ode-ejog
00c 00 00 00c 000 000 00¢ 002 - - 007 - 00% 002 - - - Jo soysoTAMIO 9
(ZG 1% 07 61 8I LI 91 ST val el cl Il or 6 8 L 9 s v € (4 I



465

SAT

ART AT UIA

[art II—ars 4]

oyeylueg [AIQIOOy =p
OHGL €
unu UInU UMNU UNu uNu wnu wnu ouNu unum whut wn unu unu = uwinur
-IXBUL -IXBUI -IXBUI -IXBUI -IXBUI -IXBUI -IXBUI -IXBUI -IxeUl -IXBUI -IXeUI -IxeUr -IXBUl -IXPUr
udd wdd wdd wdd wdd wdd wdd wdd wdd wdd wdd wdd udd widd
00c + 00c 007 O07 O00 O00 007 O07 O00 O00 007 002 - - 00% 002 VHG 7
unu = uwinur
-IXBUl -IXPUr
udd widd
dND dND dND dND dAND dWD dND dND dAND dWD dND dND - dND O0€ OOF - - dND dWND - - ply siqiossy
(A[SuIg) syueprxoruy =
dND dND dND dND dND dND dND dWD dWND dWD dWND dWD dND dND dND dND dND dND dND dND dND dWNdD PPV OTP iS
unu = uwinur
-IXBUl -IXPUr
sy BY PPV
dND dWD dND dND dWD dWND dWD dWD dWD dND dWD dWD dWD daWD OI #Ol dND dWND dND dWD dWD dW ore ye -T v
dND dND dWND dWD dND dWD dND dWND dND dWND dND dWdD - dWD . . . - . . - dWD PPY 91087 €
dND dND dND dND dND dND dND dWD dWND dWD dWND dWD dND dND dND dND dND dND dND dND dND dWNdD PPV SLID (4
dND dND dND dWND dND dWD dND dWND dND dWND dND dWdD - dWD . . . - dWND dWD - dWD Ply 9n00V— I
UOTEUIQUIOD UI IO A[BUIS syuSsY SUIAJIPIOV “VW
ve £C (ZG 17 07 61 81 LI oT SI rT el aI ott or 6 3 L 9 S 4 € {4 I
2 o 3 = to) x @ S = 3 ° FE @s eg & > g B ° °
Bot =a S iar] ° S 5 as a 5 a g a gn S g 5 = + 8 o
Ss a i] o) > y 7 S) 2 (tc) a € a ins) ° a vs) o. °
o < g a=] 5 5 ¢ = g S QO &F ° i fe} ® m
LO g a = inl 5 a a 34 a 2 } 2 3 >
aG 8 3 = 8 2 Ze & ° 2 2 3 5 a
Oe Q a ° a7 g oO a a
2 p 2 a B a ies] 2 =y
eo 8 “ as S = 8 z
= 2 3 © iv
4+ 0 wn a = an “< mo g
Oo nw Ry os
e Ss Sn & 2 @
ge 6 ee 5 5 | 8
< Oo @ 7a 2 5
Ge & Ze 8
gq a 3 o
oo n n
en oD ee
Ga & & B

Sa[qej}o39A passsooid AT[VULIOY) UT SOATJIPPE POOF JO ISTT

LeqeL


[Part III—Sec. 4]

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY

466

urnur
-IXBUI
udd
007

urnur
-IXBUI
udd
007

urnur
-IXBUI
udd
007

urnur
- - - -1TxeUr
udd

- - - 007

urnur
- - - -1TxeUr
udd

- - - 007

dod

- - WOdIH se] 8
dod

- - ong wen = 2

- - osipul = 9
dod

MOTTAA JosmNgG

ouIzIeweL op

oulsommjAIq ¢

urnur
- - -Txeur - OUISTOUIeT) T
urdd
- - 007 - Up voouog I
onemusg (q)
- wonyes TT
- oyneuuy OT
UJARTJOPVT
- WARTIQrY = =—-6
-ulyyuexeyyuej =
proe
oruoyore9
8-OdV-PI0g Jo
- Joysoy AT L
proe
oruo}ored
uInut g-ode-ejaq jo
-IXBUl - JoysoJATIOW 9
widd yeuozoreo
. - 007 - $-OdV Ba ¢

STOPOIVORP v

- oun} Jo uTUNOINQ sg

jouer) °7

TAydoroyyD
UOTEUIqUIOD UI Jo A[SuIg cyemmenN (ke)

SHUITT porjioods of} UIYIM WoeUIquUIO. UI Io A[SUIS posh 9q UeD) SYOION OD

ve

£C

ce

1@

07

61

8I

LI

91

ST

vi

el

cl

II

Ol 6 8 L

9 Ss v € (4 I



467

SAT

.

PS

ART AT UIA

[art II—ars 4]

ump
- - - - - uequey oA
ump
unt wInUr UInur wNu unm Whur wnu wNu unum whur wn urnu unu uInur = uInur -  weog-eqoreg = AT
-IXBUI -TXBUI -IXBUI -IXBUIT -IXBUI -IXBUI -IXBUI -IXBUIT -IXBUI -IXBUI -IxXBUI -IxeUr uneur -IX8UL -TXBUI -1XeUr - unpjireny =o
3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 -1XBUL 3 3 3 - wueucoseneg
Bor Bor ot Aor ot Aor Bot Aor or or ol or - %I dND - - - oT Bot Ot - ump oigery I
(uoleu
-IqUuIOS UT
Jo A]SuIs)
sums
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - gyqeiosaA CO
sjuosy suluoyoiutL =f
ulnutr
rxeur opHoyyo
- - - - - - - - - - - - - wdd¢z - - - - - - - - snouurlg "T
Spry Sulssooolg =
oyeydins
UINISSe}O g
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - dND dAND - - - urnyurunyy Lk
oyeydsoud
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - uIntoyeg OMOP, 9
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - ayeydins
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Tq umpoyey = *S
(sooard (sooord (sooord oyeuoqies
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - aToyM) oToym) ojoym) UINIIeQ = “Pp
unt uUInur UInur wnur unm UU UwNu wnu unm whut wnu wnu uNnuU xeul =- Xe Ur xeur
-IXBUI -TXBUI -IXBUI -IXBUI -IXBUI -IXBUI -IX®UI -IXBUI -IXBUI -IXBUI -IX®UI -IxXBUI -IxeUr %Sr'O MSO %Sr'O
udd wdd wdd wdd wdd wdd wdd wdd wdd wdd wdd wdd wdd urdd (sospam (sospom (sospom oyeuoonyH
Ose Ose Ose Ose OSE OSE OSE OSE OSE OSE Ose OSE OSE - - - - OS¢€ ‘SedT[s ‘seorys “saoq]s umnpoyey
unt uUuInur unm UInUl uUInu UInU wnu uINu uwnu uNu uwnu unm wu ‘saoIp) ‘soorp) “‘s0Ip)
-IXBUI -TXBUI -IXBUI -IXBUI -IXBUI -IXBUI -IX®UI -IXBUI -IXBUI -IXBUI -IX®UI -IxXBUI -IxeUr yuo} yuo} yuo}
udd wdd wdd wdd wdd wdd wdd wdd wdd wdd wdd wdd wdd urdd -uoo) -wo9) -W090) 0jej0eT
Ose Ose Ose Ose OSE OSE OSE OSE OSE OSE Ose OSE OSE - - - - Ose worur worur woTUr unpoyey °C
unt uUInur UInur wnur unm UU UwNu wnu unm whut wnu wnu uNnuU -njoyeo -nroyeo -njoyeo
-IXBUI -TXBUI -IXBUI -IXBUI -IXBUI -IXBUI -IX®UI -IXBUI -IXBUI -IXBUI -IX®UI -IxXBUI -IxeUr ye10y #707 ye107
udd wdd wdd wdd wdd wdd wdd wdd wdd wdd wdd wdd wdd udd xeur xew xeul eployyD
Ose Ose Ose OS OSE OSE OSE Ose OSE OSE OSE OSE OSE - - - - OSE %08'0 %08°0 - %08'0 unpye)
UOTEQIUIOD UI Jo A[SUIs sjuOsY BUI =
ve £C (ZG 1% 07 61 8I LI 91 ST val el cr oI or 6 L 9 Ss v € (4 I



[Part III—Sec. 4]

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY

468

UINIposS se
‘xem wddgs |

dND dAND

urnur
-IXBUI
udd
007

ayeID uINIposg

oyeuoqgied-1q
umipos

(WwoT}eUIqUIOS UI

Io Aj8uis)
sjuosy
SUTUD}TOS

ourur
-eIpus] Ayo
UINTPOstC]
umntoyeg
souljoog
oyeuls[Ty
JooA]s [Adorg
soyeuls[y
UINIPOs
soyeuls[y
uInISse}og
sopyesiye
umntoyeg
soyeuls[y
urnimouwUry

(uoljeU
-IqUIOO UT
Io A]8uls)
soyeuls[y

TA

Al

m

q

II



469

SAT

.

PS

ART AT UIA

[art II—ars 4]

- - - - - - OOULIN Jo uTMMOMg = ¢
- - - - - - jomerey 7%
Ayuo
UINUITXeUT UINUITXeUT UINUITXeUT joueres UINUITXeUT
urdd 00z - - -  udd gor -  udd gor adND - udd 90z - TAydoroyyD
yemmjen (e)
(sHuny] poyroads oy} UTYIIM UoT}eUIquIOD WI JO ABUTS pasn eq Ue) SUYNOTOD a
dND - - - dND dND dND - dND dND - Ploy SIQIoosy
SINVCIXOLLNVY O
OPrXxorp
WOOT]IS JO UINIpOs JO UrNTUTUTNTe
-Op- - - - -Op- - - - - - ‘UMmIsoUsevur ‘UMTOTeS JO soyeoT]IS €
uInIsouseUr
-op- - - - -op- - - - - - pue urmroyes jo soyeydsoyg 7
AyUO sIopmod AyUO sIopmod AyUO sIopmod
ul umMnuUr ul umMnuUr ul umMnuUr uintsouseur
-IXBUL %7 - - —--TXBUT %Z - —--TXBUT %Z - - - - - pue umMnrojes Jo saqyeuoqrey =
(suoremqmioD uy 10 ATSuIS) SLNADV ONIAVOLINV =
Ayuo Ayuo
soseIoAoq soseIoAoq
LJ te) LJ te)
dND - - - ul dND - - - - ul dND - sploy oloydsoyg = 9
dND - - - dND - dND - - dND Ploy OFFI
dND . . dND . dND . . dND - Ply oleyeLl-T v
dND . . . dND . . . dND dND - PPY 91087 €
dND - - - dND - - - - dND - Ploy seu, 7
dND . . . dND . dND . dND dND - PPV SLID I
(uopenTquios uy 10 ATSUIS) SINZDV DNIAAICIOV = V
el cl Il or 6 8 L 9 Ss v € (Jn
soseloaog
poseg yn (sopmod
poropmog /prnbrq) SyuIp
/XIW “9109 yng. 10
oseIoAog sponpolg YULIpYos soseloaog oyseg  ssosuodsiqy “OUOD) 2
poseq sojqeesoA WHI YA/INI ayqejosoA, SIOIOM spn yn 3 oomng soy sdnikg samng/ ding ‘ON
yn WdZOl] UdZzO1y poyerpAyod poyeuoqieg poyerpAyoq poyeuoqieg JOBOULA, oyeuoL = sneyjuAg purreurey SOATHPpy OY) JO oUIEN TS

sjonpoid pooj UI asN I0F SOATIIPPY Poo, JO ISTT

8 81981


[Part III—Sec. 4]

EXTRAORDINARY

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA

470

(proe

UWINUITXeUL OIGIOS se poyepNoyed) syjes wD
udd 00¢ pue YI ‘eN Si poe ciqiog sg

oyseg Ul
UWINUITXeUL UWINUITXeUL = UNUIIXeU = UINUTxeur «= Un xeur UWINUITXeUL = UNIT xeur

urdd QZ] - - wdd 9007 urdd gz urdd QoL urdd gz udd g¢z urdd ge - oprxo-Ip myding = _Z

doing Ul (ploy dlozueg se poyepnoyed)

UWINUITXeUL UWINUITXeUL UINUITXEUL = UINUITXeUr  umnuITxeUr Yoq IO yes UINTsseog
- - - - -  udd gz] -  udd gz] wudd gsz wdd gos wdd osz “UINIPOS STI pue ploy olozueg =|.
(uoyeutquioo ut 10 ATBuIS) SHALLVAMASHTAd =

soourjsqns

SULMOART, [IOI / sooueysqns

SULINOART] [VOTJUOpT omnyeN,

/ soouejsqns BULMOART] TemnyeN,
dND - - - dND - dND - dND - pue Surmoaryy yemyen
SUNOAVTA 4
-op- —_— - - -op- - -op- - -op- - JOT woos jseq sg
-Op- —_ - - -Op- - -Op- - -Op- - dOd onyq went L
-op- —_— - - -op- - -op- - -op- - sue osIpuy = 9
-Op- —_ - - -Op- - -Op- - -Op- - HOA MOTPA fosungG
-op- —_— - - -op- - -op- - -op- - ouIzIeweL op
-op- —_— - - -op- - -op- - -op- - oulsommjAIq = «¢
-op- —_— - - -op- - -op- - -op- - OUISIOUIIeD = Z

UWINUITXeUL UWINUITXeUL UWINUITXeUL UWINUITXeUL

udd 007 - - - udd 00I - udd 00I - udd 007 - Wp nesouog I
onoyudg (q)
- - - - - - woysyes II
- - - - - - oyneuuy OT
- - - - - - WIARTFOPOVT “UIARTOQIY =—-G
. - - - - - UIyUexeyUeg 8

plow oTuajore9
- - - - - - g-ode-vjog Jo roysopAT 8

plow oTuajore9
- - - - - - g-ode-vjog Jo rojsoyAIO 9
- - - - - - yewojoreo g-ode vjoq ¢
- - - - - - ouojoleo-ejOg =p
el cl Il or 6 8 L Ss v € (Jn



471

SAT

.

PS

ART AT UIA

[art II—ars 4]

“ATWO Joye
porewoqieo
Ul XeUr xeur
- - - - widd QooT udd 000I- - - - ojyeydsoyd vjour exoy umnipos I
yuersonbes c
UINUWITxeUr
- - - - - - widd O00r - - WaZOMIN, I
UINUWITxeUr
- - - - - - urdd 00s - - OplxO Byog sniojsoyg
dND dND ump ueypPp 8
WOTINTIP I9ye
OBBIOANG OAIOS
0} Apeor ur
udd QOT 0}
UINUITXeUr UINUITXeUr yoofqns “xeur
urdd oI urdd oI - - -  udd osy (areyding sy) oummmg = L
dIND - - - dIND dIND - - dND poy ouisy 9
UINUWITxeUr UINUWITxeUr xeu = UINUITxeur
%S'0 - - - %S'0 %S'0 %S'0 und) ueyuexXx =
UINUWITxeUr UINUWITxeUr xeur UINUWITxeUr
udd 901 - - - udd 00T udd 00T udd osp UNSINISy
dND . . . dND dND- . . dND souljood €
- - - - - - - sojeuIspy umMIpog (IT)
- - - - dW)D - - soyeulsyy wNIssejog (11)
- - - - dIND - - - adND soyeusyy umnroye (1)
WOT}eUTqUIOS
Ul IO A[SUIS) soyeWIsTy = Z
dND - - - dND dND - - dND orqery und
(woTyeUlquICS
UW IO A[SUIS) SUID o[qeIoSaA
SLNADYV ONIAAISTOWNA/ONISTTIGVLIS/SINADV DNINAMOIHL DO
el cl Il or 6 L 9 Ss v (a



472 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

oysed TEGO
QJOUM ‘d1Seq UOTUKO ‘oseg dTPIVH + Sw a & A A i i i a A
‘gIseg IOSUID ‘oIseg IID way 7 Bg Bg Bg Bg Bg Bg Bg Bg Bg Bg Bg
fh By oy
Sed | Bg Bg Bg
fh By oY A oy
somng/ding yn N ss 5 ss Ss
OO. .,.%0080 ' ' oO ' '
seing/djng o8uemy | = S S S
1 O11 OD ' ' ' ' '
28.8 _
af a8 ges
we & & & Be an ard A Bec
‘ SSseee5 S555 = SZE°
auyNYyD oBuepy /e[qeysap, o 0050 5000 —=8& og oO 2a 8
i) Jo / pue syn AounyD =
5 ee
ao] 2a od
z sqyeuseyy) 6 s § 2385
3 (possosoig Ajjewmueyy) ArayD a 8, ,8, S Ese
&
&
2 ATWO 98n [eLYSNpUl IOF A A A Ay asl
fon
> Ue soanemrosord YUM ooing ding 20 Bg Bg Bg Bg Bg
> song BoA /INIY poyeuosu0|
SH
eS o
2
= ATWo 9sn [eLsnpur Om & a ian
Ee} Joy soarjparosoid yy ‘oomg | 6 Zags = =
id : ‘ 000,00, ' ' oO ' '
2 ding ‘some o[qeisSoa/ nT ae
& BE 2h
oo S a2 9 8
~ A mh mm a, 2 BES s
# (o]e108u1H sSS555 S.4 2kB6s
4 pue I99g IOSULD) [reppooD sJosULD ° 0UUDDUD, ' ' io) 3 a eee
wm
g a é g
JOIB A, fs azsL
‘ A mm ae ab
Aapeg pue jerpred ‘syeqieys wn sS665 Ss = oka8
‘sdnig yn ‘soysnrD ‘soysenbg @.505O00, o) e a ees
& 3
2 5
B ou fy a &
8 8
= = g& &
iene ol é oy fh By a a 8
pozelH 2 pesteisAID prpuep ze Ss ss a 5 Ss sg
nA ,U,%00.,4 4 ' 1 9 a a
i= ea 4
a < 22 8
ca 3
< 2 2g mez  &
2 g <G eg 828 YL
Z 3 eI } wn a Oo =
SoATIppy Jo oweN | « - 2322858 BE Beek oR Lf o
2 =a — oO
Re Seg E SEE SG o8PLRBSES F
QAQasnp2 55 & FE > BS 3.0 s
COS SSF BSzZ EP ERI ZSOCEE SE
ttOnwn set Aa Ses te ft OZ DO
“ON IS al< Nant oo © A a i.) oH Ae i.)


473

SAT

.

PS

ART AT UIA

[art II—ars 4]

-op- - -op- - - - dND dND omydrnstg umpopey —¢
-op- - -op- - - - dND dND  eyeuogre) untoyey on
-op- - -op- - - - dND MND = ayeuooNTD urnjoyey
-op- - -Op- - - - dND dND oyeyoo7yT UINToyey  —_Z
sooord sooord
ayqeyosoA ayqeyosoA
/ynyy syrngy
uo ATUO uo ATUO
UINUITXBUL =  UINUITxeUr UINUITXBUL =  UINUITxXeUr
udd gcse  utdd ose - ulddgse urdd ose - - - adND qdND = ePHOTYD umigyegQ
(uoneUIquioD UI Jo AJsuIg) SINADV ONIWMIA =f
- - - - - - TOA W99Id seq
- - - - - - SOA ONT wep L
- - - - - - ouTues) OSIpuy = 9.
- - - - - - HOA MOTPA fosungG
- - - - - - ouIzIeweL op
- - - - - - oulsommjAIq ¢
- - - - - - OUISIOULIeD = Z
UINUITXBUT UINUITXBUL =  UINUITxeUr UINUITXBUT
- - - - udd 007 - urddgoz udd 007 - udd 007 Wp voouog I
onoyudg (q)
dD - - - -  wudd 907 woyses 11
adND - - - -  udd 00z oneuuy OT
UIARTJOO’T
ano - - - -  wdd 907 “myARyoqra = «6
dD - - - - udd 007 UIYUEXeyyUED 8
—ppe
oTuojores g-ode vyog
aNd - - - - add 90z Jo soysopAm LL
plow oTuajorR9
g-ode-vjoq
dND - - - - widd 90z Jo IoIsoTATIOPL «= o9.
dD - - - - urdd 007 Jeuojoreo g-ode eioqg sg
(11e
dD - - - 0} [@ Wor - wdd 90z ouojoreo-epog =f
peqqnyo)
(foyem Aayreq
dD - (11® 9% - (T1® 0}  pue [erpioo - widd 907 o1euLIN JO UUMOINDQ sg
val el cl Il or 6 9 Ss v € (4 I



[Part III—Sec. 4]

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY

474

dND
dND

UINUITXeUT
%S'0

UINUITXeUr
udd 90S

UINUITXeUr
udd 001

UINUITXeUr
udd 0S7

UINUITXeUr
udd QO|

UINUITXeUr
udd 0S7

dND
dND

UINUITXeUr
%S'0

UINUITXeUr
udd 90S

UINUITXeUr
udd QO|

UINUITXeUr
udd 0S7

UINUITXeUr
add 9007

UINUITXeUr
udd QO|

UINUITXeUr
udd 90s

UINUITXeUr
urdd 909

dND

dND

“UWINUITXeUr
uddgooz
oq Tes

WI oIOyM
‘Krroqdsey
‘ALIOQMeS
‘AIIOUO
ydooxe

udd 9001

UINUITXeUr
urdd 909

dND

dND

UINUITXeUr
udd 007

UINUITXeUr
uidd os¢

UINUITXeUr
urdd 909

dND

dND

dND
dND

UINUITXeUr
%S'0

UINUITXeUT
udd 9001

UINUITXeUr
uidd os¢

UINUITXeUr
udd 909

dND

dND

- - soyeulsyy wnoyed
- - soyeulsyy umMmouUry

(woTyeurquios wl Io ATBuIS)
soyeuls[y

uIny weyyuexX

SINADV ONINAMOIAL
Oprxold

Imydjng se oyyding
TqepAl UINIPOS
SAIV ONISSHOO0dd
Ploy sIQIog se
possoidxo oyeqiog
UINISSe}O g
UINUITXeU = UInUTxeUr pue oyeqios
urdd gos add ggg umroyen ploy s1qs0g

UINUITX BUT UNUM xXeUr

wdd gp widd oct Oprxo-Ip inyding

(ploy slozueg

se poyepnoyed)

yqoq JO Weg

UWINUITXeUr uinissejog 2 UINIpOS
add 907 - SHI ploy orozueg
(uorjeurquios ul 10 ABUTS) SHALLVAWASAUd
sooueysqng

SULINOART

dND dND [eoHuopy ommye Nn

sooueysqng

SULINOART

yeinjen pue

dND dND  Sursmoaeyy yempen

SUNOAVTA

qq
@

4

4

vi

el

cl

II

or



475

SAT

ART AT UIA

[art II—ars 4]

dND
dND

dND
dND

dND
dND

UI JO

- oe uMIpog = Z

- eyeuoqren-Ig UNIpog =|
AJSuI§) SLNADV ONINAIAOS = £
uns URED dp

- souljoog €

oyeulspy JooA]S [Adorg (A)
- sopeulsty umnIpog (AT)

- sojyeulspy urnissejog (111)

vi

el

cl

II

or

(uolyeutquios
dND
dND
dND

S v



476 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

|
=
soing/djng | © aa aa Ay gs
soIne “BoA /MINIY poyerusou0 7 2 2 2 &s
f SOTNf “POAAMIT Poverty a 1 Ooi O10, 1 1 1 = &
os 5 S555
som a1quieson | — .-o, 6666 ; ; ; ;
d Kywanoad ~ 5 s 5
ayoed ATeonjoadse sooimne yn,
Pom mea me med | 1 Oo, 1 OOD 4 1 1 1 1
n a A a
SIBJOON | = = s
1 Oo, 1 OOD 4 1 1 1 1
JOpMOd Paxil 5
Suluoseog ‘1opMog Areurng 3
“(AIp) pox] Aowsnysy syqeuiosaA | wa a, aM & =
/MnIJ yueysuy ‘rapMod ojqvyosaq | S sss 2 x
‘SjopMod jyintg ‘iapMod dnos 1 Oo 4 oOU0U 0D . a & 1
sdnog | = & a A
= Zao
2 1 Oo, O00 0 , 1 1 1 1
3
ao]
goneg uraqehog | S By By a me wy
aay = 2 = 22
5 O00 , O00 0 , 1 1 1 1
Fe 5 5
4 soones IoyO/oised Areurng | > a & Ss & Se & a8
- 3 Seamnk sss és
S 5 OUskUODOD . 1 1 1 = &
2 8 g
2 4 3
& é °o & & ee A AY AY
aa dnysjoy ~OeUIOT, SS 8 % sss
a= OUskUODOD . 1 1 1 1
3
s SOSBIOAD JINIZ SAIOS
& 0} ApeossyuLp inszq /sa8eraaoq | ~ mo & a A
ying =6paessosoid = AT [BUTIONL, ; Bg Bg ; Bg Bg ; ; ; ; ;
ran
4
4
SOyeLY [P99 WMI | wo
2 &§ && &
soyjoL/ieg ins, & pa
wormed ole 6G 6 ULUGUG LE, ; ; ;
R= | 5
Ba) g =
g 6 3
) 5 Bq
+]? fh By fh By Fr] aa
sopepemueyy Jini r= ss 5 ss 5 = &S&
mot Oo 0 1 OO 1. 6 4 1 1 = &
> 2 5
2 A a A a a 55
asooy Waszysoqyporymer | en | S ss ss ae B & 5
nos Oo 0 1 OOD 4 E 1 1 1 a = &
z a > ie}
a)
© ge E s
s 3 294 4 ¢ . g2
a) ° 3 ©
S3eg< Se B24 685 ea cbesS x ak
Oo 8s SRP Sez eee Soe SP892 2 ES
2282 24222 882 £35 72235 2 2S
ON IS| Al atannm tH or Ma nN a) O =a


477

SAT

.

PS

ART AT UIA

[art II—ars 4]

dND

UINUITXeUr
urddg 1

dND

dND

UIMNUITXeUL UINUITXeUr
udd oo, urdd oor

-XBUL
udd 901 dND dND

UIMNUITXeUL UWINUITXeUr
- wddg0z wdd 907

dND dND dND

dND

-A]WO
jourereg
1oy dND

UINUITXeUr
udd 007

dND

UINUITXeUr
urddg 1

dND

UINUITXeUr
udd 00|

dND

UINUINIXeUL UINUIXeUl UINUITxXeUr

udd 001

dND

udd 90z uidd 90z

dND

HOA MOTPA Josung
OUIZzIe}IeL
oulsorqyAI
oUIS]OULIeD

Wp voouog

oToyWAS

WOLJeEs
oyeuuny

WARTJOPVT “UTALTJOQIY

dND

ulyjuexeyyued

proe
oTUdjoIeD g-ode
elOg Jo JoysoyAI

proe
oTuozoIes g-ode-vjog
Jo IojsopAMOPL

yewojores g-ode vjog
auo}oOred-e}0g
OLIOULIN) IO wWIUMom?

joureres

TAydor0yyD
syemnjyen.

(sHtuny] porjroads om UIIM woT}EUIQUIOD UI IO A[SUIS pasn oq URED) SUNOTON

dND

dND

dND

dND

dND

dND

oyepuryed [Aqo1osy
OHEL

VHE
PIV d1q1oosy
SINVCIXOLLNV

S]IO a]qQIpo
Jo sproy Aney
JO soplIooA]SIp
pue-ouopy

aN KN TST IO

(9)
iat
OI

Nn AO TST IN SO

91

ST

vi

el cl II

or

6

(4



[Part III—Sec. 4]

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY

478

(ploy
dIQIOS se poyepNoyed)

xeul WINUITXVUL UINUITXeUl UINUITXeUl UINUITxeur WINUITXVUL UINUITXeUl UINUITxeUr Weg ‘Og “pog “Ted
- - urdd go¢ - - urdd goor wdd goor udd goot wdd oo¢ wdd go¢ wdd gos wdd pg sit pue ployoiqiog = ¢
(sjonpoid ymay
xXeUl UINUITxeUr WINUITxXeUr WINUTXVU UINUITxXeUl UINUITxeUr WoT IaAO AED)
- - widd o,- wdd gost - - - - widd gz udd 991 wdd op wdd op oprxo-Ip mnmyding¢ = Z
(ploy orozueg
se poyepnoyed)
yg 10 yes
xeul WINUITXVUL UINUITXeUl UINUITXeUl UINUITxeur WINUITXVUL UINUITXeUl UINUITXeUr UINIssejog 2 UINIpOS
- - wdd gzI- - - udd gs, wudd gc, wmdd os, wdd oz] wdd 99z wdd ooz wdd 907 sy ploy olozmeg =|
WS SH (WoHEUTquIOD UT Jo ATSUIS) SHAILVAMASAad I
(s90uRyUq)
. . . dND dND . dND . . . . . DSIN I
UHONVHNA UNOAVTIA H
soourjsqns
SULINOARTT
Teroryiye
Ayuo / soouejsqns
soourysqns SULIMOARTT
SULINOART yeonuopl omen
Ayuo Ajwo —s-yJermen / soouejsqns
SINOARTZ — SINOARTF pue SULINOAR] J
yernjeu yernjeu BulmMoaeypy jenjen pue
dND dND yernyeny dND . . dND . dND dND dND dND = Surmoaepy pemyen I
SUNOAVTA 9
- - - - - - - - - - onydnstg ume = ¢
- - - - - - - - - - oyeuogied UNTIED lp
- - - - - - - - - - oyeuoonfH umpoyeg = €
- - - - - - - - - - oyepooyT uintoyeg =
sooord
way ey
uo ATUO
asn 10J
UINUIT Xe Ur UINUIT Xe Ur
- - - - wdd ose - - - - - - wdd 9oz = spHoyyD umToyeQ
(wopeurquioD ut Jo A73uIS) SINTDV ONIN =
. . - - - - AOA Wools yseyz 8
- - - - - - AOA ony sae L
- - - - - - ouTULIeD OSIpuy 9
oT SI rT el ral IT or 6 3 L ¢ v € (4 I



479

SAT

.

PS

ART AT UIA

[art II—ars 4]

(Ayuo
soseIoAoq
yng
SLU 109)
- - dND- dND dND souloog
dIND dIND dIND dIND adND pre ommisty (A)
oyeuls[Ty
- - - - - jooA]3 JAdorg (AT)
- - - - - sopeulsty umnIpog (11)
(A]uo
soseIoAoq
WN SL
- - - - - 10J) dND soyeulsyy uInisse}og (11)
dIND dIND dIND dIND dIND - dIND dIND dIND dND = seyeurspy umioyeg (1)
(woTyeUlqui0S
Ul Io A[suIS)
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - soyeulsyy = €
UWINUITXBUL UINUITXeUr
- - - - - %S'0 %S'0 - - - - - und ueyjueX (A)
- - - - - dD - - - - - - umn wRaqqoIe) (AT)
- - - - - dD - - - - - - wuny rend (IIT)
- - - - - dD - - - - - - uewsosened = (iI)
(A]uo
soseIoAoq
yng
SLU
- - - - - awd - 103) dWD - - - - - ump oiqery (1)
(woTyeUlqui0S
Ul Io A[suIS)
- - - - - - - - - - - - Suny sqeesoaA ZT
wOTINTIp 10ye
worjdurnsuoo jeqe] wo = jaqey] uo
IO} poo wolerepoop worerepoop
yeu jo Ys qua
UWINUITXBUL UWINUITXeUr UWINUITXBUL UINUITXeUr
- - - - %S'0 %S'0 - %S'0 %S'0 - - - - - SoyoIes PoyIpON =|
(uorjeurquios ul 10 A[suIS) SINADV ONINAMOIHL
oprxorpuoqieg
dND dND dND - - - - - - - - - - - pue wes0iIN I
SCIV DONISSHOOUd sf.
91 ST val el cl Il or 6 8 L 9 Ss v € (4 I



[Part III—Sec. 4]

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY

480

xeur
add 9001

dND
dND

dND
dND

xeur
add 9001

dND

xeUul
udd 00|

oyeydsoyd
ejoulexoy uInIpos

INVUaLSanoas
aye wNIpog

- oyeuoqieg-Ig wnIpes

(uoHeuIquios ul Jo ATSUIg) SLNADV DNINALAOS

UWINUITXBUL UINUITXeUr
- WOE WOE
UWINUITXBUL UINUITXeUr
- wddooot wddgoor

Jouqrog

oureyIodsy

sjoA]og pue siousjooms [eIOINIV

uN ueT]ED

UND Jo1sq

Suan Za

4

91

ST

vi

el

cl

II

or



481

SAT

.

PS

ART AT UIA

[art II—ars 4]

—_— - - - dND ueucoiseley =“
—_— - - - UINUITXeU SY/UIs O'¢ uns ueyjueKX ‘7
—_— - - - UINUITXeUL BY/UIs O'S soeuisyy UNIpOS = “T
SOATIO SUIYME IO} soyseg Joy syuosy SuMuoyxMy_, HH
—_— - - - UINUITXeUL BY/UIs O'S ojeurejnys WINIpos-ouop, =“
srooueyug Inoaryy =D
— - - - soourjsqng SuLmoary [eDoynty  “¢
— - - - SooUR}sqns SULMOARTE [ROUOp! oINjeN “7
— - - - dWD soourjsqns SULIMOALTJ [eINjeU pue smMoAey [emenN “|
smoaryy =f
—_— - - -WOIT [e]O} SE WINUITXeU BY/WIS ST‘O oyepoeyy SnoMoqy ‘7
—_— - - -WOIl [e}O} Se WINUITXeU SY/WIS ST‘O aqyeuoonfyH snowy = *|
sjuosy SUISITIQeIg /MOoNUS}OY MojoD =
yoorde pormp ul ploe SIqios se possoidxo
UINUIITXeUT SY/UIs ¢°O - - - UINUIITXeUT SY/UIs ¢°O ojeqioose UNISsE}Og /UIMIPOS /ploy sIQIOS = *¢
ploy olozuog se possoidxo
—_— - - - UINUITXeU Syx/WIS | ajeozusg UINIsse}og /UINIPOs /ploy s1lozueg = *Z
ZOS se possodxo
op ydinsejyour soyeydynstq soyyding urnpoyeg
UINUITXeUL SY/US 0'T ZOS ATWO umMulTxeur 3Byx/UIs OS - ZOS ATWO uMuUTTxeur By/uIs ¢°T fornisseyog /umnIpos ‘eprxorq imyding I
SOAT}VAIOSOIg
—_— - - - UINUIITXeUL SY/UIs 70 ply d1q10osy-T I
syueplxonuy oO
—_— - - - dD OpIxoIpAH UINIssejog °Z
_ - - - dND oprxompAH uMIpog |
sroyensoy ANpDOy
_ - - - dND ploy oneyyoorpAHS
—_— - - - UINUITXeW SYx/UIs ST poy omoey =r
—_ - - dND Ploy oNeoW  *E
—_— - - - UINUITXeW SYx/UIs ST ploy olewel-T “7
— - - - wununxeU Bx/WS CT POY UND T
(woTyeuTquIOS UI Io A[8UIg) syUuoSy SUIAJIPIOVY “VW
mnu0009 ‘ON
SINN 3 SHU AIG = paywooIsaq psyeiH sojeq SUISTO YT SOATIO 219GR.L SAQIPpY pooyjoowenN 7S

sjonpoid pooj UI asN I0F SOATIIPPY Poo, JO ISTT
TT e198


[Part III—Sec. 4]

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY

482

dND
dND

UINUITXeU Syx/WIs ¢

UINUITXeU Syx/WIs ¢

dND
dND
dND

yonpoid pus
payjms ul suorumpyeg
se ulnulixeur Sy/uIs ¢*]

dND
dND

ploy onoey jo sono
WosONIN

oplxolq woqreg
ouexoyIsAjog JAqIOUIC.
JoIs04TH

TOHQIOS

(sopers poog) [IO [erour
Snooury] [90ST

oye UNTOTeED

oyepoe TT umntoyed

opHoTyD umnpoye
SOATIO PAYMS Io syuosy suru]
uns reny

und WRddqoreD

N mene aN mM tT HOE

tom ow a


483

SAT

.

PS

ART AT UIA

[art II—ars 4]

oplurAd0l0,
se possoidxo woreulquios

Xeur Ul IO A[suIs oplmeAdOLIO,
- - - udd oT - - - - - ulhissej}og 10 uMIpos Io UNTIED I
sIolIpoul yeysAIQ
umnipog Jo
uInissejog “UINTOyeg = “umMTuOWUTy
‘UINTUTUINTy JO soyeieays
- - - - - - - JO sojyeyured ‘soyeystIAP, op
OPIXOIP WOOTTIS JO UINIPOS Jo wMNIUTUNye
- - - - - - - ‘amnysouseyy “UMTOTeED JO soyeoI]IS €
UINISOUs ey
- - - - - - - pue wmnpoyed jo soyeydsoug 7
(pa 1 1a (pa % TE
woy poqqn[D) woy poqqn[D)
WOTEUIQUIOD UT woT}eUTquIOS
Io A[suls ul 10 AjSuIs - UINIsouseUr
- - - ‘xeul 34/307 - - - ‘xeul S¥/3S] pue umes Jo soyeuoqies I
WOTEUIQUIOD UI IO A[SuIs syuose Suryeojuy +  _
S'p'Z woryepnsor Jo
ZZ APNTY Jopun
porroods se joqr]
e Jopun pjos oq
0} ArOWOTJOOFUOD
jo ommpoeynueur
oy) 10} popuayut
ST ponpoid ou) JI
uidd gs] Surposoxo
you juNoure ue
Ul yuosord oq
ABUL OpIxoIp
xeul imydjns ,,
- udd 0s{ xeur uldd oy - xeur uldd Op xeur uldd Op xeur uldd oy xeur urdd 97 xeur uldd 97 eprxoIp mmydins I
OATIBAIOSOIG WV
dniks wapjoy
Jesnsoqny jes wouruTOS
resns PolpIyOy
resns ving ony wor] /ies
(isoq) ‘(aesns inydjng) worjejyueld poezIpoy pes
resns resns ‘Arosser WOUTUIOD dniAs seSns poropmog
espueyy espueyy “Md ‘TISTIAL aqipy asoonjs pouiq dniXs osoonph asonxod /supy resng =—s eSBs powjoy OAT}Ippe POoy Jo oureN

Wes pur sieSng UI asn IOJ SOATIIPpe POO} Jo ISVT

cI P1981


[Part III—Sec. 4]

EXTRAORDINARY

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA

484

-Op- -Op- -Op- -Op- woysyes II
-op- -op- -op- -op- oveuuy OT
-op- -op- -op- -op- UIARTOPT “UIARTJOQIY =
-op- -op- -op- -op- UIyUexeyUeg 8

ploe urmoyore9
-op- -op- -op- -op- g-ode ejog jo rojso JAIL

ploe urmoyore9
-op- -op- -op- -op- g-ode ejog jo rojso [AIO 9
-op- -op- -op- -op- jeuojores g-ode eyog ss ¢
-op- -op- -op- -op- ouojores BOG =p
-Op- -op- -op- -op- OOULIN Jo uTUMOINO = g
-op- -op- -op- -op- jourreg = Z

A]WO soyejoooyo
adND adND adND porly uy add ogy xe TAqdoroyyQ oT
(WoTyeUTquIOS UI Io A[SuIs) JemmeN (e)
(onoyUAS IO JeIMyeU JOYE “o'r ‘sse[O Wes OT} UTYTIM nq spUN] poyloeds oy) UIYM WoTeUIquIOS UI IO A[SUIs posn oq UeD) SINO|OQ =D
- xeul 34/3 0] - - QeoT]IS UMNTUTUINye UrNIpEs €
- - - - OPIXOIp WOSTTIS 7
(€ Oo} | Woy peqqnio)

- - - - oyeydsoyd umes I
(woTyeUTquIOD UI Io A[suIg) syuoSe Buryeouy

pL¢€ worepnsoy ropun
dND dND dND dND poss] se SATeATOSold J SSeIQ fp

(ploe sIqIos se poyepnoyed)

s}es UINIsse}og ‘UINIpog
xeur wddggs] - xeur wddgo0z xeur wddgool xeur wddggs | ‘uINTOTeD SHI pue ploe sIqQIOg €
xeur wddgo0z xeur wddgs¢ xeur wddgo0z xeur widdos] xeur uldd 9007 eprxoIp mmydins ZT

ayeozueg UINIsse}oOg pue
xeur wddggs] xeur wddggs | xeur wddggs | xeur uldd 90s] UINIpoS ‘poe o1lozuog I
(WOT}eUTIQUIOD UI IO A[BUIC) SOATJEAIOSOIg VW
L 9 Ss v (Jn

POT!

AIOWOTJOOFWOD ‘opsodurog ‘uleld “ATA ‘ON
uns s]qqng sums Surmeys sosuozo'y dolj IeSNg /poseq Iesng ‘OVA -oyeTOOOYD JopMod B%0009 OAl}Ippe JO oweN TS

wns s[qqng /wINns SuLMay ‘AISUOT}D9FUOD paylog IeBNng ‘aye[O90YD “IapMod 20507) UI SN IOF SAATIIPPL POO} JO SVT
€T 91981


485

SAT

.

PS

ART AT UIA

[art II—ars 4]

dD ‘oyewoqies

sopyetoqies

(woryeurquios ut Io A[8uIg) UINIMOUUTY pue UINIsoUseyy

uInTsouseUl/ oyeOgIeD WINTOTeD - gD ‘ojyewogsreo umroyeg dWD 20909 991] WO XPUT %S'0 ‘UINTOTeD “UINIsse}og ‘WINIpos I
(worjeurqurios wo Jo A[suIg) syuese BuIzIexTyY
aNd - JorOOATD TT
- - SOYOIEIS POYIPOW. OT
- - uewsoselseg 6
o)e1v9}sou0UT
- ueyiqios oua[AqoJAxAJOg =
- Oyereojsliy, uRWqQIOg = =s_L
xeur 8y /UIs QT - OJLILIISOUOUL UL}IQIOS 9
xeul By /uId ¢ - oyeojourorsAjod jorooAySATOg = ¢
xeur Sy /Ws OQ] sploe Aye JO sIajso osorong a
€dIND xeur By /u0d OT wyoeT
woryepnsor woryepnsor woryepnsor sproe Ayey oTqrpo
oy} Ul poprAoid sy oy} Ul poprAoid sy oy} Ul poprAoid sy dND dND JO sopliooA]S Ip pue ouopy I
(woTyeuTquIoS UI Io A[SuUIg) JoWIsnUI =
dAND dAND dND - wpe JAUI€
WOTEUIQUIOD UT
adND adND adND Jo ABuys xeur 3y/3 | - uyueA Z
soourjsqns SUIINOART [eIOyIIy
/soouerjsqns SULINOART, [eoTTWOpT
omen /ssouejsqns SurMoary
dND dND dND dND dND Jermyen pue moar yemen
(WoTyeUIQUIOS UI Io A[ZUIS) sMoarLT q
xeur wddgoo0l - xeur wddgoo0l - - OplxoIp UNTUe] 6
-op- -op- -op- -op- - ouIzenieL 68
-Op- -Op- -Op- -Op- - AOA MOTPA FostMg LL
-Op- -Op- -Op- -Op- - AOA On] wen = 9
-op- -op- -op- -op- - oulures OSIpuy = ¢.
-op- -op- -op- -op- - JOT Wood sey
-op- -op- -op- -op- - Up nesowog ss €
-op- -op- -op- -op- - ouIsIomleE) = Z
ATWO soyejoooyo
udd 00 Xt udd 00 Xt udd 00 Xt poly ut urdd oot xew - oulsommyAIq I
(WoTyeUIQUIOD UI IO A[BUIC) JoyeU BULMOTOO OTUeBIOUI puke MO]Oo oTjoyJUAS (q)
L 9 Ss v € (Jn



[Part III—Sec. 4]

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY

486

dND

dND
dND
dND

XBUI %7Z'0
D

dN

XBUL %Z

dND
dND

xeu udd gos]
xeur uidd gsz
xeur uidd gsz

dND

xeu uldd goog
dND

CO7d se xeut widd 90077

dND

dND
dND
XBUI %7Z'0
dND

XBUI %7'0

dND
dND

dND

dND
dND

dIND ‘oyeuoqiesiq umnipes

dND

dND
dND
XBUI %7Z'0
dND

XBUI %7'0

dND

dND
dND

xeur widd 9os¢
xeur uldd 0d]
xeur uldd 0d]

dND
yuose Surioygng se qIWD

xeu udd 0007
dND

SO7Td se xeur uidd goog]

dIND ‘oyewoqsreorq urntpos
/oyewoqsreoiq UNITED

dND

dND
xeur widd 90z

xeur uidd 90z
xeur uidd ogy
xeur widd 90z
xeur widd 90z

dND

xeul Sy/uIs ¢
dND

CO7d se xeur By/UIB ¢°Z

dND

dND

dND
dND

xeul Sy/uIs ¢

dND
WOTOLIF BOd0D

UO COTd SB Bx/UIS ¢°7

yoieys poyeydsoyg
SnooUe]]o0STV

(opeisd poo) plow o1reayg Jo siyes
UINIpOs ‘uINIsoMAseyy “UINTOTeD

(epeis poo.)
uyjereg pnb] Jo xem wyyereg

OUTID0ATD

TIO yerouly

Iesns SUld]

oye

sjuRoliqny]

asoyHy]eo JAYjour Axoqreo uIMIpos
resy iesy

(epeis poo) oulepeH
syuose SurspAqjor

Uryyo98T

ploe o1qroosy-T

oyeyjes [Adorg

oyepuryed [Aqioosy
joroydoooy

OHaL

VHd

sjueplxonuy

proe oe]
oyeydsoydejourexoy ulnipos
ploe olreyel-T

ploe OLD

poe o1roydsoyg

sjue[nproy /sjuose SursTemnany

oprxoipAH umnjuourury pue urNTsousepy

umMnroyed “UINIssejog ‘uINTIpos

€OOTM
SB soJeuoqieolq uNTsoUseyy

‘umloyeD “UINIssejog ‘UINTpog

Noantwn Denn twn ory etannweanmntn

9

S

(4



[art II—ars 4]

ART AT USI 2 SATS

487

Table 14
List of food additives for use in Milk products

Jooueg /eueyyo

Jopmod Asa,

syonpoid wroses

Apueo oo] * sorfol AMAL
‘201 AINA ‘Sossop wozory ‘XIU
WeRIINII pod ‘WM “Wes10 907

Jopmod ulead pure ropmod ITA

Io Joynq snorpAyuy

fey ypu snoipAyuy
pue [ro seyngyey ATTA
Jong

YIU pesuapuoo pousjooms

yim poyerodeag

symnysod Jo sodAy ITV

peoids assays possao0lg

gsa0Yyo passao0lg

esooyo
PEPPAYS/MND /P20TS /aseaqD

SOATIPpe JO OWEN

‘ON IS

15

14

13

12

11

10

GMP
GMP
GMP
GMP

XBW WOTRUIqUIOS
UL 10 A[suIs 3¥/3 ¢-(oyeydsoyd
esl] se) proe onoydsoyddjod
pue proe sroydsoydoyji0
jo syes winIpos ‘oyeI19

GMP

10 g/kg
max

wmipos ‘sproryo wntoye szopMod YI

Stabilisers and emulsifiers singly or in combination expressed as anhydrous substance

A

woreurquios

ul Jo A[8urs 33/3 ¢ <opMod uIRaID

XBUL UOTJEUIQUIOD
UL BYH/8 ¢ Io A[SuIS B¥/3 7

XBUL UOTJBUIQUIOD
Ul SY¥/3 ¢ 10 A[SuIs B¥/3 7

Sodium, Potassium and calcium chloride
Sodium, Potassium and calcium carbonate -
Sodium, Potassium and calcium Citrate
Calcium salt of orthophosphoric acid
Calcium salt of polyphosphoric acid
Potassium salt of orthophosphoric acid
Potssium salt of polyphosphoric acid
Sodium salt of orthophosphoric acid

Sodium salt of polyphosphoric acid

150 mg/kg -

max

5 g/kg
max

Carrageenan

2

Sodium, Potassium, Calcium and

Ammonium Alginates

3

10 g/kg
max

Gelatine

4

2.5 gikg
max

Lecithins

5

10 g/kg
max

10 g/kg
max

Pectins

6

10 g/kg
max

5 g/kg
max

Sodium carboxymethyl cellulose

7



[Part III—Sec. 4]

EXTRAORDINARY

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA

488

yonpoid osoy}

UINUITXeUT UINUITXEUL WINUITxXeUr JOF Q[QeINS Q'["¢ WONe[NSoI ul posi] sjuose
Sy/US OP Sx/UsOp BsyA/USOP SuIsTjiqeis pue Surdjispnure Joyjo Auy [7
oyeuoqieo
uInToyeg JO pue syeuoqies uesompAy
UINIPOS YIM poe o1oydsoyg (q)
‘oyeuogies UINTOTeD IO pue oyeuOqie
wosorpAy UINIpOs YIM ploe SLID (8) 07
ayeIyO wmn1oyes (0)
snioydsoyg se poyepnoyeo pue oyeIO unissejog (q)
SY/UISG poooxo jou ]]eYs ‘oyeIyID ummipos (®) 61
punoduros snioydsoyd poppe
yey ydooxe urnulrxeul Sy/UIsOP ‘plow ooydsoyd Ajod
pue Ip/ouour Jo syyes umMIpos (0)
‘prow o1soydsoyd Ajod
pue Ip/ouour jo syyes ume (q)
‘prow o1soydsoyd Ajod
pue Ip/ouour Jo sqyes urnissejog (8) gT
xeur
- - - 84/3 O1 - - - - - - - esoqnyqoo JAMO LT
xeur xeur
- - - B8x/8 OL B1/38 $7 - - - - - - sploe Aye} Jo sopliooA]S Ip pue Ou. 9]
Xeur O}eILIJSOUOU UR}IQIos ouaTAMJOAKOATOY (P
- - 34/3 O1 - - - - - - -  ofeIVOISTY weyqros ouaTAyJoOAxKOATOg (0
o}LaINe[OUOU WeyIQIos oUoTAYJOAKOATOg (q
sploe Aqqyey JO sIoyso JorooATBATOY (@ SI
xeur
- - - 34/3 O1 - - - - - - - oyeursye JooA]S ouojAdolg fp]
xeur xeur
- - - 34/8 OT - - - - By/3 ¢ - - ueleyaomny = ¢T
xeur xeur
- - - - - - - - By/3 ¢ - - uns ekeley «ZT
xeur xeur
- - - - - - - - syx/3 ¢ - - uns YyURORSRIL [IT
xeur xeur
- - - 8Y/8 OL - - - -  —-BY/B ¢ - - wns uequexX OT
xeur xeur
- - - =8Y/8 OT - - - -  —-BY/B ¢ - - uns ieny = 6
xeur xeur
- - - 84/3 O1 - - - -  — BY/8 ¢ - - iesy = 8
ST val el cl Il or 8 L 9 Ss € (Jn



489

xeur xeur xeur

- : - - - - - wudd got urdd got udd oor TrAydor0T4O
xeur xeur xeur xeur

- widd g¢ - - - udd og wdd oo, udd oo, wdd oor UIARTJOQIY
xeur xeur xeur xeur xeur

- wdd gor - - udd 901 - udd oo, uwdd op, wdd go, urdd gol wiUuInomn

(woTyeUuTquIOS UI Io A[SuUIs :yemMyeN) sInojoD

worerepoop uOTeIEpPOp WoT}eIe[Ep soourjsqns

0} 0} 0} SULINOARTE [COTW /soouejsqns

yoofqns yoofqns  yoolqns SULMOARTE [ROMUOpT oNyeN /soouejsqns

- dWD - - - - - dWD dWD - - Surmoary. yemyeu pue simoary jempen

- - - - - - - - - - - wyyruea [Aq

- - - - - - - - - - - Uy TUeA,

SAT

PS

- - - - - - - - - - - syoedyxXo VTTIUCA,

SINOALT J

jAdordAxorpAy yours

oyejooer oes

YoIeIS PosIplxO

oyeydsoyd yorrjsouow
jAdordAxorpAy ‘oyeydsoyd yoreqsiqy

=a N OH OT

vi
el
cl
II
or

ART AT UIA

- - - - - - - - - poyeyAjooe ‘oyeydsoyd yoreqsiq
- - - - - - - - - oyeydsoyd yorrssiq
- - - - - - - - - jAdordAxorpAy ‘JorooA]S YOrejsiq
- - - - - - - - - poreyAjooe ‘JorooA]S Ores,
- - - - - - - - - JOIDOATS YOILISIC.
- - - - - - - - - poyepAjoor oyedipe yoreysiql

- - - - - - - - - yoreys poyoroyg

Qaunysod yay pue pomoaey ur AjUo) xew wdd got

- - - - - - - - - - Yoreys poyeory) TeITV

[art II—ars 4]

worerepoop

0} yoofqns
xeur

- 8x/8 o¢ - - - - - - - - - yoreys poyeory ploy

UWOTLUIQUIOD UI Io A[BUIS poyorIes PolIpopy
xeur

- 34/83 OL - - - - - - - - - OSOTN][9O OUT][EISATOOIOIPAL

UOTJEUIQUIOD UI Io A[SUIs yUoSe BSUIAJIPOU pue IOUOYONL

el cl Il or 6 8 L 9 Ss v € (4

NO TFT OH OD


[Part III—Sec. 4]

EXTRAORDINARY

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA

- - dND - - - dND - - - - - - oyeydsoyd umripos
xeUul xeUul
- - udd 9007 - - - udd 9007 - - - - - - oprxompAy uINTo[eD pue uNIpOS

- - - - - - - - - - - - - oJeUOQIeS UIMIPOS pue sJeMOQIedIg UINIPOS
- - Pats) - - - - - - - - - dWD sojeuoqieo UnIsouseU puke uMTOTeD
sroyepnsor AVIpIOV

WOTFEUIQUIOD UI IO A[SuIs

490

- - xeu widd gg] 5 S ADd woord seq (Y
o
xeut wdd QoT = kc} AOd onyq qwerug (8
oa
xew wdd go] > : ouTULIeD OSIpuy GJ
xew widd oo, a 2 TOA MoTIOA Josung (0
5
xew widd oo, 2. 3 OuIzeIWeEL (p
xew wid QQ] % 3 ourlsommpArgq (9
°
xew wid 9g] Fe aurstourey (q
a’
xe uidd got <5 Wp nesouog (e
(woTyeuTquIOS UI Io A[SuIs :oNoyyUAS) sINOTOD
xeul (ssoooid oyydjng urnimourury)
- - - 8y/8 o'€ - - - - - uidd ¢ - - - smo]oo jourered
- - - adND - - - - - adND - - - (uze]q) Smojoo JourereD
xeur
- - - wdd gor - - - - - widd oor - - - UIYUEXeyyUED
plow o1ouwsjores
- - - - - - - - - - - - - g-ode ejog Jo royso [AIG
xeur xeur xeur plow o1ouwsjores
- - - wdd gor - - widd ¢¢ - - widd 901 - - widd ¢¢ g-ode vjog Jo Ioyso JATIOPL
xeur xeur xeur
- - - wuidd 0ot - - widd ¢¢ - - widd 901 - - widd ¢¢ yewojoreo g-ode vjog
PeIMo]od pemojoo pommojoo
osueso osueso osueso
0} [eUILOU 0} [eUIIOU 0} [eUTIOU
xeul xeul xeul xeul xeul (olyel OS:0S) sIseq
- - - wdd gor - - widd 9z - - widd oot wddos-o] urddgs-o][ wddos-ot UIXIG ION /WIXIG WO joRyXO OFeUUYy
xeur xeur xeur xeur
- - - - - - udd 901 - - - uidd oo, wdd go, udd gol (joviyxo yeInyeN) ouozoreD
xeur xeur xeur
- - - widd oot - - urdd ool - udd 00I - - widd oot ouozored Bog
ST val el cl Il or 6 8 L 9 Ss v € (4

Ere NOM


491

SAT

.

PS

ART AT UIA

[art II—ars 4]

“ey “en SM ‘TY JO sozereays
IO soyeyTurpeg ‘soyeysTIA] (0

OPIXOIp
WOOTTIS 10 fuIMIpOs JO UNTUTUMye
UINISOUSeUL “UINTOTeS JO sayedT]ISg (p

- - - - - - - - - xeul uInIsouseUr
84/3 OT pue urnroyes Jo soyeydsoyg (0
uInIsouseUr
pue umroyes Jo soyeuoqieg (q
asotnyed (e I
yuose Suryeonuy I
urlur ¢ Jo
yidep uy
yuosoid
10"
‘eoeyans
orenbs
- - - - - - - - - wp/su Z (woAUIe}EU) WIOLIeUg = §=Z
(woryeuTuIOS ul Io A]SUIS)
ur ploe o1qros se possardxa soyeqios
- - - - - - - - - sy/3 | uMnIoje> pue uINIssejog ‘plow oIqIOg I
ATWo Juourjeor pury /soejins og =
xeur
urdd xeul
0007 - - - - - - - -udd oooe UWOTEUTqUIOD UI Jo A[ZUIS proe
otuotdoid se possordxo oyeuordoid
umyoyed pue uINIpog ‘proe ormoldoig = ¢
xeur
udd xeul xeul xeul
ral - - - - - - uidd ¢-z] wdd cz] wdd ¢-7] WISIN 7
xeur
urdd
0001
:osooyo
popporys
“pacts
“yn TOT
‘Xeur ‘Xeur ‘Xeur
xeul urdd urdd urdd ptoe o1qios se possoidxo soyeqios umpoyed
urdd 9007 - - - - - 000€ 000€ 000€ pue urnissejog “UINIpOg ‘proe o1qI0g I
SOATJVAIOSOIG DO
ST val el cl Il or 9 Ss v € (Jn



[Part III—Sec. 4]

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY

492

ayeiz1O umIssejog (q

q@ 8eSq BE5
E ¢a28 2 g 2B
¢ Sea ¢ Sea oyes1o uINIpog (& “7
Sawa e Tah I proe o1roydsoyddjod
BeCLK BECLH pue Ip/ouour jo yes wunmpog (9
2gSeg saheeg
& BRES & She & proe o1roydsoydAjod
>es g 2 >es es pue Ip/ouour Jo yes umMTsyeD (q
AEB AEB
- - - - - - - a 2 ~ 5 = z * 5 ploe o1s0ydsoyddéjod
2 .
S S A a s S 5 z pue Ipsouour Jo yes umissejog (@
Y past pag uolequIUroS ul Jo ATSUIS WI JoIsINUg =f
dWD dWD au0jdR] BOP OMOON]IH OT
SOTd Se
WM Wor}
-BUTqUIOS
Ul IO SOTd Se possoidxe oyeydsoydAjod
A[Surs /amnissejog /umIpos (q
xeul SOTd Se possoidxs oyeydsoydoyy0
- - -  - BY/8 7 - - - - - - uMIoyeD /UMIssejog /uMIpog (@ 6
- - - dWD - - - - - - ayeuoqies uasompAy uMIpos —s_g
xeul (s}]e@s WINIssejog
- - -  BY/B T - - - - - - foINIpog 2% prow oewelt)-T Lb
- - - dAND - - - - - - (-Td) proe oe 9
SIOIJISTNUID SIOTJISTNUIO
qua qua
xeUul xeUul sourjsqns snorpAyue se possoidxo
- - - - - - - 83/3 Op 34/3 OF - — oyeMOgIeO UINTOTeD /oyeuoqrestq uNIpOS S
syes
urnissejod SIOIJISTNUID SIOTJISTNUIO
uInIpos qua qua
SUIpHyoUl xeul xeul
- - - adND - - 84/3 0p 34/3 OF - pre oeeT op
SIOIJISTNUID SIOTJISTNUIO
qua qua
xeUul xeUul
- - - dAND - - 81/8 Op 34/8 OF - prow onoow g
SIOT SIOT
-Isynuro —--1s Muro
YIM XBUL YIM xeUr
- - - - - - - SY8 Op 84/8 OF - proe oroydsoyd =
syes
urnissejod SIO} SIOT]
umnipos -Isynuro —--1s Muro
surpnyour UM XBUL YIM xeUr
- - - - dAND - - 81/8 Op 34/8 OF - poe ong
UOTEUIQUIOD UI IO A[SuIs sjuose BuIAJIPIOW = ¢-
‘UINTUOMIUTy
ST val el cl Il or 9 Ss v € (Jn



493

SAT

.

PS

ART AT UIA

[art II—ars 4]

- - - JOIs0ATD)
SNOOUET[OOSTIL
- - - poe on)

sjsIS1ouAs jueprxonUuy

- - - ojostue AxorpAy poyepAing

- - - oyeyjes [Aoopoqd

- - - oyeyes ATI

. . - oyeyyes [AO

- - - opeyes [Adorg

sjoroydos0}
- - - PpoxTA ‘sjoroydooo, eydyy

- - - oyereoys [AqIoosy
oyeyurrted [AqIoosy Z

- - - prow SIQIoosy -T T
UWOTJLUIQUIOS UI IO A][SUIS JURPIxOTUY

oyemoqies
umMToyeo JO pue oyeuoqgieo wWosoIpAY
UUNIpOS WIM proe ooydsoyd (q

oyewogied UINTOTed IO pue aJeuOgIeD
- UosOIpAY UMMIPOS YIM ploe oMID (e

- oyeryO untToyed (9

Sa Za

ST

xeur
- - 84/8 OS - -
- - - dND dND
xeur xeur
- - - uidd ool 84/SugLT
xeur
- - - - 34/8U1001
xeur
- - - - 34/8U1001
xeur
- - - - 34/8U1001
xeur
- - - - 34/8U1001
Jopmod
Weald UT
AyUo proe
dIqroose
se xeul xeur
- - - 84/8 oo BY/BuINOS
xeur
- - - 87/8 5-0 -
vl €l al II Ol



494

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY

[Part III—Sec. 4]

Table 15
(Use of Food Additives in individual variety cheeses)

sooya
SuyeID piey ex

og

yoquioues

gsooy wWRaID

sIOTWIUTO[NOD

93e}]09
powrery /osey09

QUO[OAOIg

Ul[Neg-juTes

JOUS|EL

Ispeyuswmwy

sosueg

mieaey

epnon

wepy

oqueq

Jeppoyo

SOATIPpe JO OWEN

“ONIS

(4) (3) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16) (17) (18)

(3)

(1) (@)

A.

WNWIXeUl ALTA
JO BY/BUIQ0T

WNWIXeUl ALTA
JO BY/BUIQ0T

WNWIXeUl ALTA
JO BY/BUIQ0T

WNWIXeUl ALTA
JO BY/BUIQ0T

WNWIXeUl ALTA
JO BY/BUIQ0T

WNWIXeUl ALTA
JO BY/BUIQ0T

WNWIXeUl ALTA
JO BY/BUIQ0T

WNWIXeUl ALTA
JO BY/BUIQ0T

WNWIXeUl ALTA
JO BY/BUIQ0T

WNWIXeUl ALTA
JO BY/BUIQ0T

WNWIXeUl ALTA
JO BY/BUIQ0T

WNWIXeUl ALTA
JO BY/BUIQ0T

WNWIXeUl ALTA
JO BY/BUIQ0T

WNWIXeUl ALTA
JO BY/BUIQ0T

WNWIXeUl ALTA
JO BY/BUIQ0T

Calcium Chloride

Stabilizers

WUT xXeU
Sy/8ul 009

WUT xXeU
Sy/8ul 009

WUT xXeU
Sy/8ul 009

WUT xXeU
Sy/8ul 009

WUT xXeU
Sy/8ul 009

WUT xXeU
Sy/8ul 009

WUT xXeU
Sy/8ul 009

WUT xXeU
Sy/8ul 009

WUT xXeU
Sy/8ul 009

WUT xXeU
Sy/8ul 009

WUT xXeU
Sy/8ul 009

WUT xXeU
Sy/8ul 009

WUT xXeU
Sy/8ul 009

Colour
Annatto
Beta Carotene

B
1.
2

15mg/kg

maximum

Enzymes

C.

Alpha-amylese
(Aspergillus

1.

oryzae var).

Sprjos YT Jo Sysws |
wn

Alpha-amylese

(Bacillus
expressed in

Megaterium

2.

dWD

UINWITXeUr

2
oN =
42 a a=
= 3 [7
2 os
Sau ¢e8
nA ow
a 44 0
iz] se 3st
3 a1 7)
=a sm Oo 4
BER e2S
a $5988
mM tone
n


495

SAT

.

PS

ART AT UIA

[art II—ars 4]

S007 9'L (A)OSE USD pla popuoury “|

oyeuls[Ty

JOoATD)
ouojAdolg °6

- - sUI}oeg = *g
- - auyepeH *L

oyeuls[Ty
wuniwoullry “9
umypoyed
/UINISSe}O J
/sINIpoOS
jo yeuisty = *¢

uiny weyyuexX

+

umf)
yyueoesery

und vAIe SL

WIND Jenn

Soa Nn

urewsoselie)

SWOT}BUTQUIOS
ul 10 AjSuIs
sjuosy suluoyouL = “a

PIOV SIQIOS

se poyepnoyes

oyeqios uINIssejog

‘opteqios UINIpos

‘ploy o1qQIog

SOAT}VAIOSOIQ ‘“C
PeyToqe]

eq pihoys OWD
Wo somAzugq

4

7
3
e (sTurroyruoyor]
o snqToeg)
my (oserpAyoqies)
a z osojAure-eydiy “9
5 S (sioruqns
a snyTroeg)
5 osojAure-eydiy “¢
Es “(sniqtydour
2 -IdY}OIeIIS
8 snqjoeg)
osojAure-eydiy = ‘py
(81) (L1) (91) (ST) (v1) (€1) (1) (1D) (or) (6) (3) (1) (9) (s) (vy) (¢) (z7) (1)



[Part III—Sec. 4]

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY

496

oy uog
~~ wis $7 WI yNOsqy wis $7 WI jOsqy wis $7 UI JUOSqy wis $7 UI JUOSqy wis ¢Z7 WI yUOsSqy TIN pue vun} pouurey = ¢[
~~ wis ¢Z7 WI yUOsSqy wis ¢Z7 WI yUOsSqy wis ¢Z7 WI yUOsqy wis ¢Z7 WI yUOsqy wis $7 Wl juosSqy TIN yeour qeio pouureg ZI
~~ wis ¢Z7 WI yUOsSqy wis ¢Z7 WI yUOsqy wis ¢Z7 WI yUOsqy wis ¢Z7 WI yUOsqy wis ¢Z7 WI yUOsqy TIN uoules pouuey [|
syonpoid od&y ourpies
~~ wis ¢Z7 UI JUOSqy wis ¢Z7 UI JUOSqy wis $7 UI yUOsqy wis $7 UI yUOsSqy wis $7 WI yUOSqy TIN IO soulpies pouuey OO]
~~ wis ¢Z7 WI yUOsqy wis ¢Z7 WI yUOsqy wis ¢Z7 Ul JuOsqy wis ¢Z7 UI JUOSqy wis ¢Z7 UI JUOSqy TIN duniys pouues 6
wis $7 WI yuOsqy wis ¢Z7 WI yuOsqy wis $7 WI yuosqy wis $7 UI yUOsqy wis $7 UI JUOSqy wis $7 UI JUOSqy TIN Ysljuly pouues 8
013/001 W183 /07 Wis) SIE] OA sly powes
~~ wis $7 UI josqy wis $7 UI josqy wis $7 UI josqy UeY} SIOUL JON UeY} SIOUL JON UeY} SIOUL JON pop / ys poyes ok
wis / 001 wid / 07 wid / sie] oA
~~ wis $7 UI josqy wis $7 UI josqy wis $7 UI josqy UeY} SIOUL JON UeY} SIOUL JON UeY} SIOUL JON suly yeys pouq 9
Jooroy} somnpxrur JO
W3/00T WI3/0Z wWis/ SYye] OATE «=—- SOT YSTF poourur 10
~~ wis $7 UI josqy wis $7 UI josqy wis $7 UI josqy UeY} SIOUL JON UeY} SIOUL JON UeY} SIOUL JON SIOT[]J YS wozorg = ¢
013/001 W183 /07 wis) SIp{e] OAT
~~ wis $7 UI josqy wis $7 UI josqy wis $7 UI josqy UeY} SIOUL JON UeY} SIOUL JON UeY} SIOUL JON Yslj woz0ly op
ws / 0OT WIS /0Z wis/ sIp[e] oAYy
~~ wis $7 UI josqy wis $7 UI josqy wis $7 UI josqy Urey) S10Ul JON uey) o10Ul JON yey} OIOUI JON YSU woz0lg
wd / OT W183 /07 wis) SIp{e] OAT
~~ wis $7 WI yNOsqy wis $7 WI yNOsqy wis ¢Z7 WI yUOsqy Uey) OIOW JON UeY) OIOU JON yey} O10UL JON pinbg wozo1j
wis/ YAR] ouo
~~ wis ¢Z7 UI JUOSqy wis ¢Z7 UI JUOSqy wis ¢Z7 Ul JuOsqy wis ¢Z7 WI yUOsqy wis ¢Z7 WI yUOsqy yey} o10UL JON poyoos
WIs/ SIP{e] SATy
~~ wis $7 UI josqy wis $7 UI josqy wis $7 UI josqy yey} OIOUL JON yey} OIOUI JON yey} OIOUI JON MEY
SIQISqOT USZ0IY = Z
wis/ YAR] ouo
~~ wis ¢Z7 UI JUOSqy wis ¢Z7 UI JUOSqy wis ¢Z7 Ul JuOsqy wis ¢Z7 WI yUOsqy wis ¢Z7 WI yUOsqy yey} o10UL JON poyoos
wd / OT W183 /07 wis / SIE]
~~ wis $7 WI yNOsqy wis $7 WI yNOsqy wis ¢Z7 WI yUOsqy UeY) SIOUL JON ULY) OIOW JON = OAT. RY} OIOUL JON MET
sumed 10
sdurmys uwozolq I
6 8 L 9 Ss v € (Jn
suosursyiod snorAjouroeyeleg eyosiys snoine ‘ON
UWINIPIsSo[O OIQlA, aeIaJOYD OIqlA 3 e[jowourpes snoosoo0]Aydeig TOO “a yUNOS Veg [RIOL yonpoid oy} Jo oureN JS

SAOOA VAS YOd SLNANAMINOAA TVOINO TOIOUOIN
IHTavh

:syuouoNbayYy [BoISoporgo1l :@ XIGNAddV


497

SAT

.

PS

ART AT UIA

[art II—ars 4]

8001 8001 8001 8 10 yur 001 8 10 [MINOT ezis ojdureg
D0€ yrodsuen
xeUL “JuOTqUTy JOMO] 10 D8 1- Dov O10 DOE XvUT ‘uaTquIy Do 7 10 2B oBvI0Ig
acre) gp¢0 8°qL‘9°p-20 qux10 g°s-20
qeL‘oZ1e 9°gZ1e seie KG 1c 9
¢ ¢ ¢ ¢ ¢ 3-14 sSOUlOPIND Suyjdureg “6
s/juosqy s/juosqy s/yuosqy - 3/ yuosqy W gsoussojA0ouo] = BIIO4ST'T 8
3/001 - 3/001 B/yuosqy - W
8/01 - 8/01 - - ww (uiesuyIpI0g WMNIPLsOTD)
go!qorseuy (q)
3/0001 - - 3/01 - W
8/001 - - 8/5 - uw ( snoroo'g) —_g,d1qoroy (ke)
syunos o10dg L
- 3/0$ 3/01 - - W
- 3/07 - - - UL githoo pjour pue yseox “9
B/Q[Uey) ssoT 8/0$ 8/001 - B/Q[uey) ssoT W
- 3/01 3/01 - - ur (eatyIsod asepn3eoo)
gsnome ydeg  *¢
8¢7/ jwosqy 8¢7/ jwosqy 8¢7/ jwosqy - 8¢7/ jwosqy WwW pelouowyes =“
S/juosqy S/juosqy S/juosqy - 8/juosqy Ww OOH
3/0$ 3/0 8/01 wey) ssoT - 8/01 WEY) ssoT W
3/01 3/01 - - - uw ziunoD UOJTOD = *Z
3/000‘0S 3/000‘0S 8/00S‘T ya 3/000‘0S W
3/0000 3/000‘01 3/00 - 3/000°0€ wi pUNOD oe] [EOL]
(3) (1) (9) (s) (vy) (¢) (z7) (1)
B28 & & SFE és S, g. S
ee 5. 8 208 a5 5 é
ne 8 a oQ fywa 8 oa 3
oe ® a oo an
o & a aes 2 2g la) s
gos 2 58 So = z
eos g g 2 = B g
Po & ad B ae ~~ an
zB & e res Ss =
B a A <4 =
ES = 6 3 &
» & a. 5 a
& ~ g. 5
= r ~~

SLONdOUd WWW WOd AWALANVAaVd TVOIDOTOIPAO WIN

@ ATaVL


[Part III—Sec. 4]

EXTRAORDINARY

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA

498

syonpoid Arfep yUa1aJIp IoJ syuouTorMbad [eoISO[OIqOIONAL 9-1

8001 8001 8001 8001 8001 8001 ozis odureg
yodsuen
2 OF % 0 2 OF % 0 Do 7% 0 Do 8% F Do 8% F JAMO] IO Do 8I- W wses01g
sre 0 sre 0 sre 0 squire 0 gqL‘9-z 0 g9'er'e0
Cioaral 4 Cioaral 4 96t7e 96t7e 1c ZRIC 9
¢ ¢ ¢ ¢ ¢ ¢ g-1 sSOUl[OPIND Suyjdureg “6
sosooyo Joyo
BZ /juosqy
asooyo prey
3/ yuosqy s/yuosqy s/yuosqy s/yuosqy 3/ yuosqy 3/ yuosqy W gsoussoyA0ouo = BILIO4ST'T 8
-- -- -- 8/001 8/001 -- Ww (wio8ulyi0g UINIPLSso]D)
-- -- 8/01 8/01 -- ur go!qorseuy (q)
-- -- -- -- -- -- UL ( snorso"g) =p, 91qoIoy (8)
syunog o10ds L
8/001 8/0ST 8/001 8/001 8/QTueY) ssoT 8/QTueY) ssoT Ww
8/0$ 3/0ST 8/0S 3/01 - - ww glthoo pjour pue yseax “9
8/001 8/001 8/001 8/0001 B/o[ wey) ssoT B/o[ wey) ssoT Ww (oatHsod osepn8eoo)
8/0S 8/0S 8/0S 8/001 -- -- ur gShome ydeg “¢
8¢7/ juosqy 8/ juosqy 8¢7/ juosqy 8/ juosqy 8¢Z/ jwosqy 8¢Z/ jwosqy Ww pelTououres = “y
B/OT wey) ssoT B/OT wey) ssoT 8/juosqy B/OT wey) ssoT 8/juosqy 8/juosqy Ww HOH EC
8/06 8/06 8/0S 8/00$ B/OT wey) ssoT 8/001 Ww
8/0$ 8/0S 3/01 3/001 - 3/0 uw zglunog WOJTOD = *Z
8/000°00'T 8/000°00°S -- -- 3/000‘SL 8/000°0S‘7 Ww
8/000°0S 8/000°00‘€ -- -- 8/000°0S 8/000°00‘7 ur pPUNeD oe] [eOL  *T
(v1) (€1) (1) (11) (or) (6)
e e ze z 22 a8 g z un
2 Fa 208 @ § So 3 2 Z
we g Ao ° 2 $ — ao) =a °
2 ind os = Aa = @ = 5 :
™~ aes oO n $ = B g
Q a” o 8 gc * g
e 3 S$ gb = ES
B 2 g e cas B. °
. z. g 8 p 5
&
2 2. Es
fad oO
a 8 B.
Ly o



[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 499

%Sampling Guidelines:

The sampling for different microbiological testing parameters proposed in the standards is to be ensured aseptically by a trained person at
manufacturing units following guidelines given in IS 11546:1999 /ISO 707:1985 (Reaffirmed 2010). The samples shall be stored and
transported under appropriate temperature conditions and insulations within 24 hours of sampling to accredited laboratory for analysis as
per the approved test methods. A large sample size may be drawn (if desired) according to the tests required and the type of product.
Preservatives shall not be added to samples intended for microbiological examination. Three sample sets shall be taken from full production
batches. Each sample set shall comprise of a minimum of five samples of 100 grams each taken randomly from throughout the batch. The
samples will be submitted to the laboratory in the original unopened packaging, sealed at the time of sampling maintained in their original
physical state. A set of five samples shall be tested from three different accredited laboratories and the final decision shall be drawn based
on three test results. There will be no provision for retesting or re-sampling for microbiological testing.

10Sampling plan and interpretation:

The following terms, as used by the International Commission on Microbiological Specifications of Foods (ICMSF) are defined and used in
this standards:

n= The number of sample units which must be examined from the batch/lot of food to satisfy the requirements of a particular sampling plan.

c= the maximum allowable number of defective sample units. This is the number of sample units, which may exceed the microbiological
limit specified by m. These are considered marginally acceptable results provided they did not exceed the limit specified by M. When more
than this number is found; the lot is rejected by the sampling plan.

m= Represents an acceptable level and values above it are marginally acceptable in terms of the sampling plan.

M= A microbiological criterion which separates marginally acceptable quality from unsatisfactory/potentially hazardous quality. Values
above M are unacceptable in terms of the sampling plan and detection of one or more samples exceeding this level would be cause for
rejection of the lot.

When 5 or more units of the same variety from a lot or consignment are analyzed (n=5), no more than 2 units (c=2) should exceed the
maximum tolerance (m) for microbiological levels stated in the reference criteria and no 1 unit should exceed the stated level for the
maximum tolerance (M).

Microbiological criteria and their interpretation: Three categories of microbiological quality have been assigned in standard based on Total
plate count, levels of indicator organisms (Coliform count and yeast & mold count) and the number or presence of pathogenic bacteria.
These are satisfactory, unsatisfactory and potentially hazardous.

1. Satisfactory: if a maximum of c/n value are between m and M, and the rest of the values observed are < m ---- means the results are within
limits of acceptable microbiological quality and no action is required.

2. Unsatisfactory: If one or more of the values observed are >M or more than c/n values are between m and M --- means the results are
outside acceptable microbiological limits linked with hygiene indicators (Total plate count, Coliform count and Yeast and mold count) and
are indicative of poor hygiene or poor handling practices. Under these conditions the premises producing such unstatisfctory product shall
be stopped and will carry out the detailed investigations for nonconformity/ noncompliance during manufacturing. The manufacturing of
such prouduct will be re-started only after HACCP/GMP audit clearance of the premises by the food safety authority and compliance of
fresh product with the regulatory limits.

3. Potentialy hazardous: If one or more of the values observed are >M or more than c/n values are between m and M --- means the results
are outside acceptable microbiological limits linked with pathogenic bacteria (E. coli, Salmonella, coagulase positive Staph aureus, B.cereus,
Cl. Perfringens, L. monocytogenes) and are indicative of serious food safety concern and immediate remedial action should be initiated.
Such results will attract enforcement/prosecution by the concerned food safety authorities. Withdrawal of any of the food still available for
sale or distribution and if applicable, recall action may be initiated. An investigation of food production or handling practices shall be
investigated to determine the source /cause of the potential of the problem so that remedial action can commence. A detail risk assessment
shall also be done. Failure by an owner to either cease manufacture of product or withdraw/recall product from sale when requested to do
so shall result in seizure of that product where the officer has reason to believe that it is contaminated with pathogenic bacteria.

14 Reference test methods:

Test Methods Reference

Microbiology - General guidance for the enumeration of micro- IS 5402:2002/ 180:4833:1991 Reaffirmed 2007
organisms - Colony count technique at 30°C (first revision)

Microbiology - General guidance for the enumeration of Coliforms: IS 5401(Part 1): 2002/ISO 4832:1991 Reaffirmed 2007 OR IS
Part 1 Colony count Technique (first revision) OR General guidance 5401(Part 2): 2002/ISO 4831:1991 Reaffirmed 2007

for estimation of Coliforms: Part 2 Most Probable Number

technique (first revision)

Methods for detection of bacteria responsible for food poisoning: IS 5887(Part 1):1976 Reaffirmed 2009
Part 1 Isolation, Identification and Enumeration of Escherichia
coli (first revision)

Methods for detection of bacteria responsible for food poisoning: IS 5887(Part 3):1999/ ISO 6579:1993 Reaffirmed 2009
Part 3 General guidance on methods for detection of Salmonella
(second revision)

Methods for detection of bacteria responsible for food poisoning: IS 5887(Part 8/Sec 1 ):2002 / ISO 6888-1 :1999 Reaffirmed 2007
Part 8 Horizontal method for enumeration of coagulase-positive OR IS 5887(Part 8/Sec 2 ):2002 / ISO 6888-2 :1999 Reaffirmed
staphylococci (Staphylococcus aureus and other species) Section 1 2007

Technique using Baird-Parker Agar Medium OR Methods for


500

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY

[Part III—Sec. 4]

detection of bacteria responsible for food poisoning:

Part 8 Horizontal method for enumeration of coagulase-positive
staphylococci (Staphylococcus Aureus and other species)

Section 2 Technique using rabbit plasma fibrinogen Agar Medium

Method for yeast and mould count of food stuffs and animal feeds
(first revision)

Indian Standard Specification for sterilized milk

Methods for detection of bacteria responsible for food poisoning:
Part 6 Identification, Enumeration and Confirmation of B.cereus

Methods for detection of bacteria responsible for food poisoning:
Part 4 Isolation, identification of Clostridium perfringens,
C.botulinum and enumeration of Cl. perfringens (second revision)

Microbiology of food and animal feeding stuffs - Horizontal

method for detection and enumeration of Listeria monocytogenes :

Part 1 Detection method OR Microbiology of Food and Animal
Feeding Stuffs -Horizontal Method for the Detection and
Enumeration of Listeria monocytogenes-

part-2 Enumeration Method

Methods of sampling for milk and milk products

IS 5403:1999 Reaffirmed 2005/ ISO 7954:1987 Reaffirmed 2009

IS: 4238-1967 Reaffirmed 2010
IS 5887(Part 6):1999 / ISO 7932:1993 Reaffirmed 2007

IS:5887 PART IV:1999 Reaffirmed 2009

IS 14988(Part 1):2001 Reaffirmed 2007 / ISO 11290-1 :1996 OR
1S:14988(Part 2): 2002 Reaffirmed 2007/ ISO:11290-2 :1998

IS 11546:1999 / ISO 707:1997 Reaffirmed 2010

11 The microbial specifications for ripened butter are the same as for pasteurised butter excluding the requirements of total plate count

12 The requirement on yeast and mold counts is not applicable for mold ripened cheese.

13 The standard requirements of lactic counts of one million c.f.u./g min as specified by BIS in such products/ or such products containing

Probiotic organisms shall be applicable.


501

SAT

.

PS

ART AT UIA

[art II—ars 4]

wis $7 UI JUOSqy

wis $7 UI JUOSqy

wis $7 UI JUOSqy

wis $7 UI JUOSqy

wis $7 UI JUOSqy

wis $7 UI JUOSqy

wis $7 UI JUOSqy

suo30jADOUOUL PIIO}STT
yunod srodg siqo1oeuy
yuNOD Pho pue ysvax
snome snooooojAydeys
eTTosIyS

E][ououyeEsS

YOO “a

yUNOD UWLOFIOO

yuNoy oe] d [BIOL

aN OH ST HO OM OD

(Teydrer)
Ssounynn

(uosreg ‘Tey
preqsnypy

(Inedrer)
aoe]

(yerpy ‘yyuos)
IosulH

(me)
yoorsnus 7

(gunes)
youu]

(funeyey ‘e1007)
bigienitg)

syuouroImN boy

>
~”

wis $7 UI JUOSqy

wis $7 UI JUOSqy

wis $7 UI JUOSqy

wis $7 UI JUOSqy

wis $7 UI JUOSqy

wis $7 UI JUOSqy

suo30jADOUOUL PIIO}STT
yunod srodg siqo1oeuy
yuNOD Pho pue ysvax
snome snooooojAydeys
eTTosIyS

E][ououyeEsS

YOO “a

yUNOD UWLOFIOO

yuNoy oe] d [BIOL

aN OTH OH ODN

S

(4

(elueyq) Jopuelos

(Sune) soaoio

(fel) eissep (uryoyep) woureuuD

(THOTT, TeT)
urnorsdes

pue sory (moreyq) wowopiep

(enfyerys) Aemerep

syuouroImN boy

‘ON

“TIS

SHOIdS YOU SUALANVAVd TVOIDO'IOIFOUOIN

€ HIGVL


[Part III—Sec. 4]

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY

502

wis $7
Ul yuOSqy

wis $7
Ul yuOSqy

wis $7
- Ul yuOSqy

suo30jADOUOUL PIIO}STT
yunod srodg siqo1oeuy
yUNOD plhoy|] pue yseoz,

snome snoosooojéydeys

ByTOsIYS

eTJououyes
YOO “a
yUNOD WHOF]OD

yuNoy oe] d [BIOL

WM Oo ™ Oo D

=a NO OO OT

Nes

woululod

s1Q1PA

epnoojesy

(fedq empyng)
Licenticg)
poyerpAyoq

AIQ]OO

(unsyeT) o1TeD

ony Joddog

osueyl poliq

(anyoury)

JopMog

osurey, polid

soorls (poos sdoysig)

uemoly

syuouroImN boy

A

wis $7 UI JUOSqy

wis $7 UI JUOSqy

wis $7 UI JUOSqy

wis $7 UI JUOSqy

suo30jADOUOUL PIIO}STT
yunod srodg siqo1oeuy
yuNOD Pho pue ysvax
snome snooooojAydeys
eTTosIyS

E][ououyeEsS

YOO “a

yUNOD UWLOFIOO

JUNOD 1] _ [CIOL

aN OTH OH ODN

Gunes) peostuy

eyesey, Poxt

JopMog Amo

(pre)
OLIOULIN

(1esoy)
woyjes

(seq sey)
kddog

(qorrurtTex)
yorjg roddog

‘ON
syuourormboay * 1$



[art II—ars 4]

ART AT USI 2 SATS

503

TABLE 4: Microbiological requirements of food products given below: -

S1 No Products

Parameters

Limits

1

10
11
12

Thermally processed fruits and vegetable products

a) Dehydrated fruits and vegetable products
b) Soup powders

c) Desiccated coconut powder

d) Table olives

e) Raisins

f) Pistachio nuts

g) Dates

h) Dry fruits and nuts

Carbonated beverages, ready - to - serve beverages

including fruit beverages

Tomato products

a. Tomato juices and soups

b. Tomato puree and paste

c. Tomato ketchup and Tomato Sauce

Jam / Marmalade / Fruit jelly / Fruit Chutney
and Sauces

Other fruits and vegetables products covered
under Regulation 2.3

Frozen fruits and vegetables products
Preserves
Pickles

Fruits Cereal Flakes

Candied and Crystalised or Glazed Fruit and Peel
a) All Fruits and Vegetable products and ready -

to - serve Beverages including Fruit Beverages
and Synthetic products covered under
Regulation 2.3

b) Table olives

c) Raisins

d) Pistachio nuts

e) Dates

f) Dry fruits and nuts
g) Vinegars

a) Total plate count

b) Incubation at 37°C for 10 days

and 55°C for 7 days

Total plate count

a) Total plate count
b) Yeast and mould count

c) Coli form count

(a) Mould count

(b) Yeast and spores
(a) Mould count

(a) Mould count

(b) Yeast and spores
(c) Total plate Count
Mould Count

Yeast and spores

Yeast and mould count

Total plate count
Mould count
Mould count
Mould count
Mould count

a. Flat Sour Organisms

s

Staphylococcus aureus
Salmonella

Shigella

Clostridium botulinum
E. Coli

g. Vibrio Cholera

m @ & ©

a) Not more than 50 / ml
b) No changes in pH

Not more than 40,000 / gm

Not more than 50 cfu / ml
Not more than 2.0 cfu / ml

Absent in 100 ml

Positive in not more than 40.0
percent of the field examined

Not more than 125 per 1 / 60 cmm

Positive in not more than 60.00 percent

of the field examined

Positive in not more than 40.00 percent

of the field examined

Not more than 125 per 1 / 60 cmm

Not more than 10000 / ml

Positive in not more than 40.00 percent

of the field examined

Not more than 125 per 1 / 60 cmm

Positive in not more than 100 count/gm

Not more than 40,000 / gm
Absent in 25 gm / ml
Absent in 25 gm / ml
Absent in 25 gm / ml
Absent in 25 gm / ml

(i) Not more than 10,000 cfu / gm for
those products which have pH less than 5.2
(ii) Nil for those products which have

pH more than 5.2
Absent in 25 gm / ml
Absent in 25 gm / ml
Absent in 25 gm / ml
Absent in 25 gm / ml
Absent in 1 gm / ml
Absent in 25 gm/ ml



504 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part III—Sec. 4]

International Numbering System (INS) for Food Additives-

The following list is only for identifying the food additive and their synonyms as published by the Codex on 23.11.2005 Codex. For the
latest updates, JECFA/Codex website may be referred to (www.codexalimentarius.net, www.codexalimentarius.net/web/jecfa.jsp)

A, List sorted by INS number

SL INS Food Additive Name Technical functions
No. Number

1 2 3 4

1. 100 Curcumins Colour
2. 100G) Curcumin Colour
3. 100i) Turmeric Colour
4. 101 Riboflavins Colour
5. 101G) = Riboflavin Colour
6. 101(ii) Riboflavin 5'-phosphate, sodium Colour
7. 102 Tartrazine Colour
8. 103 Alkanet Colour
9. 104 Quinoline yellow Colour
10. 107 Yellow 2G Colour
11. 110 Sunset yellow FCF Colour
12. 120 Carmines Colour
13. 121 Citrus red 2 Colour
14. 122 Azorubine / Carmoisine Colour
15. 123 Amaranth Colour
16. 124 Ponceau 4R Colour
17. 125 Ponceau SX Colour
18. 127 Erythrosine Colour
19. 128 Red 2G Colour
20. 129 Allurared AC/Fast Red E Colour
21. 130 Manascorubin Colour
22. 131 Patent blue V Colour
23. 132 Indigotine Colour
24. 133 Brilliant blue FCF Colour
25. 140 Chlorophyll Colour
26. 141 Copper chlorophylls Colour
27.  141(i) Chlorophyll copper complex, Colour
28.  141Gi) Chlorophyll copper complex, sodium and potassium Salts Colour
29. 142 Green § Colour
30. 143 Fast green FCF Colour
31. 150a Caramel I-plain Colour
32. 150b Caramel II - caustic sulphite process Colour
33. 150c Caramel III - ammonia process Colour
34. 150d Caramel [V-ammonia sulphite Process Colour
35. 151 Brilliant black PN Colour
36. 152 Carbon black (hydrocarbon) Colour
37. 153 Vegetable carbon Colour
38. 154 Brown FK Colour
39. 155 Brown HT Colour
40. 160a Carotenes Colour
41. 160a(i) Beta-carotene (synthetic) Colour

42. 160a(ii) Natural extracts Colour



[art I—ave 4] ARG hl USA 3: AST 505
1 2 3 4

43. 160b Annatto extracts Colour

44. 160c Paprika Oleoresins Colour

45. 160d Lycopene Colour

46. 160e Beta-apo-carotental Colour

47. 160f Beta-apo-8'-carotenic acid, methyl or ethyl ester Colour

48. lola Flavoxanthin Colour

49. 161b Lutein Colour

50. 161c Krytoxanthin Colour

31. 161d Rubixanthin Colour

52. 16le Violoxanthin Colour

53. 161f Rhodoxanthin Colour

54. 161g Canthaxanthin Colour

55. 162 Beet red Colour

56. 163 Anthocyanins Colour

57. 1634) Anthocyanins Colour

58. 163(ii) Grape skin extract Colour

59. 163(iii1) Blackcurrant extract Colour

60. 164 Gardenia yellow Colour

61. 166 Sandalwood Colour

62. 170 Calcium carbonates Surface colourant, anticaking agent, stabilizer
63. 170G) Calcium carbonate anticaking agent
64. 170Gi) Calcium hydrogen carbonate anticaking agent
65. 171 Titanium dioxide Colour

66. 172 Iron oxides Colour

67. 172(i) Iron oxide, black Colour

68. 172i) Iron oxide, red Colour

69. 172(iii1) Iron oxide, yellow Colour

70. 173 Aluminium Colour

71. 174 Silver Colour

72. 175 Gold Colour

73. 180 Lithol rubine BK Colour

74. 181 Tannins, food grade Colour, emulsifier, stabilizer, thickener
75. 182 Orchil Colour

76. 200 Sorbic acid Preservative

77. 201 Sodium sorbate Preservative

78. 202 Potassium sorbate Preservative

79. 203 Calcium sorbate Preservative

80. 209 Heptyl p-hydroxybenzoate Preservative

81. 210 Benzoic acid Preservative

82. 211 Sodium benzoate Preservative

83. 212 Potassium benzoate Preservative

84. 213 Calcium benzoate Preservative

85. 214 Ethyl p-hydroxybenzoate Preservative

86. 215 Sodium ethyl p-hydroxybenzoate Preservative

87. 216 Propyl p-hydroxybenzoate Preservative

88. 217 Sodium propyl p-hydroxybenzoate Preservative

89. 218 Methyl p-hydroxybenzoate Preservative


506 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—SEc. 4]
1 2 3 4

90. 219 Sodium methyl p-hydroxybenzoate Preservative

91. 220 Sulphur dioxide Preservative, antioxidant

92. 221 Sodium sulphite Preservative, antioxidant

93. 222 Sodium hydrogen sulphite Preservative, antioxidant

94. 223 Sodium metabisulphite Preservative, bleaching agent, antioxidant
95. 224 Potassium metabisulphite Preservative, antioxidant

96. 225 Potassium sulphite Preservative, antioxidant

97. 226 Calcium sulphite Preservative, antioxidant

98. 227 Calcium hydrogen sulphite Preservative, antioxidant

99. 228 Potassium bisulphate Preservative, antioxidant

100. 230 Diphenyl Preservative

101. 231 Ortho-phenylphenol Preservative

102. 232 Sodium o-phenylphenol Preservative

103. 233 Thiabendazole Preservative

104. 234 Nisin Preservative

105. 235 Pimaricin (natamycin) Preservative

106. 236 Formic acid Preservative

107. 237 Sodium formate Preservative

108. 238 Calcium formate Preservative

109. 239 Hexamethylene tetramine Preservative

110. 240 Formaldehyde Preservative

111. 241 Gum guaicum Preservative

112. 242 Dimethyl dicarbonate Preservative

113. 249 Potassium nitrite Preservative, colour fixative

114. 250 Sodium nitrite Preservative, colour fixative

115. 251 Sodium nitrate Preservative, colour fixative

116. 252 Potassium nitrate Preservative, colour fixative

117. 260 Acetic acid, glacial Preservative, acidity regulator

118. 261 Potassium acetates Preservative, acidity regulator

119. 261(i) Potassium acetate Preservative, acidity regulator

120. 261(ii) Potassium diacetate Preservative, acidity regulator

121. 262 Sodium acetates Preservative, acidity regulator, Sequestrant
122. 262(i) Sodium acetate Preservative, acidity regulator, Sequestrant
123. 262(ii) Sodium diacetate Preservative, acidity regulator, Sequestrant
124. 263 Calcium acetate Preservative, stabilizer, acidity Regulator
125. 264 Ammonium acetate Acidity regulator

126. 265 Dehydroacetic acid Preservative

127. 266 Sodium dehydroacetate Preservative

128. 270 Lactic acid (L-, D-and DI-) Acidity regulator

129. 280 Propionic acid Preservative

130. 281 Sodium propionate Preservative

131. 282 Calcium propionate Preservative

132. 283 Potassium propionate Preservative

133. 290 Carbon dioxide Carbonating agent, Packing agent

134. 296 Malic acid (DL-L-) Acidity regulator, flavouring agent.

135. 297 Fumaric acid acidity regulator

136. 300 Ascorbic acid (L) Antioxidant


[art I—ave 4] ARG hl USA 3: AST 507

1 2 3 4

137. 301 Sodium ascorbate Antioxidant

138. 302 Calcium ascorbate Antioxidant

139. 303 Potassium ascorbate Antioxidant

140. 304 Ascorbyl palmitate Antioxidant

141. 305 Ascorbyl stearate Antioxidant

142. 306 Mixed tocopherols Antioxidant

143. 307 Alpha-tocopherol Antioxidant

144. 308 Synthetic gamma-tocopherol Antioxidant

145. 309 Synthetic delta-tocopherol Antioxidant

146. 310 Propyl gallate Antioxidant

147. 311 Octyl gallate Antioxidant

148. 312 Dodecyl gallate Antioxidant

149. 313 Ethyl gallate Antioxidant

150. 314 Guaiac resin Antioxidant

151. 315 Isoascorbic acid Antioxidant

152. 316 Sodium isoascorbate Antioxidant

153. 317 Potassium isoascorbate Antioxidant

154. 318 Calcium isoascrobate Antioxidant

155. 319 Tertiary butylhydroquinone Antioxidant

156. 320 Butylated hydroxyanisole Antioxidant

157. 321 Butylated hydroxytoluene Antioxidant

158. 322 Lecithins Antioxidant, emulsifier

159, 323 Anoxomer Antioxidant

160. 324 Ethoxyquin Antioxidant

161. 325 Sodium lactate antioxidant, synergist, humectant, bulking agent

162. 326 Potassium lactate antioxidant, synergist, acidity Regulator

163. 327 Calcium lactate acidity regulator, flour treatment agent

164. 328 Ammonium lactate acidity regulator, flour treatment agent

165. 329 Magnesium lactate (D-,L-) acidity regulator, flour treatment agent

166. 330 Citric acid acidity regulator, synergist for Sequestrant

167. 331 Sodium citrates acidity regulator, sequestrant emulsifier stabilizer

168. 3310) Sodium dihydrogen citrate acidity regulator, sequestrant emulsifer, stabilizer

169. 331(ii) Disodium monohydrogen citrate acidity regulator, stabilizer, sequestrant, emulsifier

170. 331Gii) Trisodium citrate acidity regulator, sequestrant, emulsifier,
Stabilizer

171. 332 Potassium citrates acidity regulator, sequestrant, Stabilizer

172. 332(i) Potassium dihydrogen citrate acidity regulator, sequestrant, Stabilizer

173. 332(ii)  Tripotassium citrate acidity regulator, sequestrant, Stabilizer

174. 333 calcium citrates acidity regulator, firming agent, Sequestrant

175. 334 Tartaric acid [L(+)-] acidity regulator, sequestrant, antioxidant
synergist

176. 335 Sodium tartrates Stabilizer, sequestrant,

177. 3350)  Monosodium tartrate Stabilizer, sequestrant

178. 335(ii) Disodium tartrate Stabilizer, sequestrant

179. 336 Potassium tartrate Stabilizer, sequestrant

180. 336) Monopotassium tartrate Stabilizer, sequestrant

181. 336i) Dipotassium tartrate Stabilizer, sequestrant

182. 337 Potassium sodium tartrate Stabilizer, sequestrant


508 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—SEc. 4]

1 2 3 4

183. 338 Orthophosphoric acid acidity regulator, antioxidant Synergist

184. 339 Sodium phosphates acidity regulator, texturizer, sequestrant, stabilizer
Emulsifier, water retention agent

185. 339(G) | Monosodium orthophosphate Acidity regulator, texturizer, Sequestrant,
stabilizer, Emulsifier, water retention agent

186. 339(ii) Disodium orthophosphate acidity regulator, texturizer, sequestrant, stabilizer
Emulsifier, water retention agent

187. 339Gii) Trisodium orthophosphate sequestrant, stabilizer, Emulsifier, water retention
agent, acidity regulator, Texturizer

188. 340 Potassium Phosphates acidity regulator, texturizer, sequestrant,
stabilizer, Emulsifier, water retention Agent

189. 3400) Monopotassium orthophosphate acidity regulator, texturizer, sequestrant, stabilizer
Emulsifier, water retention Agent

190. 340(ii) Dipotassium orthophosphate acidity regulator, texturizer, sequestrant,
stabilizer, Emulsifier, water retention Agent

191. 340Giii) Tripotassium orthophosphate acidity regulator, texturizer, sequestrant,
stabilizer, Emulsifier, water retention Agent

192. 341 Calcium phosphates acidity regulator, texturizer, water retention
agent, flour treatment agent, raising agent,
firming agent, anticaking agent

193. 3410) Monocalcium orthophosphate acidity regulator, texturizer, water retention
agent, flour treatment agent, firming agent,
anticaking agent

194. 341i) Dicalcium orthophosphate acidity regulator, texturizer, flour treatment
agent, raising agent, firming agent, anticaking
Agent

195. 341(i1i) Tricalcium orthophosphate acidity regulator, texturizer, water retention
agent, flour treatment agent, firming agent,
anticaking agent

196. 342 Ammonium phosphates acidity regulator, flour treatment agent

197. 342) Monoamonium orthophosphate acidity regulator, flour treatment agent

198. 342i) Diammonium orthophosphate acidity regulator, flour treatment agent

199, 343 Magnesium phosphates acidity regulator, anticaking Agent

200. 343(4) Monomagnesium orthophosphate acidity regulator, anticaking Agent

201. 343(ii) Dimagnesium orthophosphate acidity regluator, anticaking Agent

202. 343(iii) Trimagnesium orthophosphate acidity regulator, anticaking Agent

203. 344 Lecithin citrate Preservative

204. 345 Magnesium citrate acidity regulator

205. 349 Ammonium malate acidity regulator

206. 350 Sodium malates acidity regulator, humectant

207. 350(i) Sodium hydrogen malate acidity regulator, humectant

208. 350(ii) Sodium malate acidity regulator, humectant

209. 351 Potassium malates. acidity regulator

210. 351(i) Potassium hydrogen malate acidity regulator

211. 351(ii) Potassium malate acidity regulator

212. 352 Calcium malates acidity regulator

213. 352(i) Calcium hydrogen malate acidity regulator

214. 352(ii) Calcium malate acidity regulator

215. 353 Metatartaric acid acidity regulator

216. 354 Calcium tartrate acidity regulator

217. 355 Adipic acid acidity regulator

218. 356 Sodium adipates acidity regulator


[art WI—ars 4] ARG hl USA 3: AST 509

1 2 3 4

219. 357 Potassium adipates acidity regulator

220. 359 Ammonium adipates acidity regulator

221. 363 Succinic acid acidity regulator

222. 364(1) Monosodium succinate acidity regulator, flavour Enhancer

223. 364(ii) Disodium succinate acidity regulator, flavour Enhancer

224. 365 Sodium fumarates acidity regulator

225. 366 Potassium fumarates acidity regulator

226. 367 Calcium fumarates acidity regulator

227. 368 Ammonium fumarates acidity regulator

228. 370 1, 4-Heptonolactone acidity regulator, sequestrant

229. 375 Nicotinic acid Colour retention agent

230. 380 Ammonium citrates acidity regulator

231. 381 Ferric ammonium citrate anticaking agent

232. 383 Calcium glycerophosphate Thickener, gelling agent, Stabilizer

233. 384 Isopropyl citrates Antioxidant, Preservative, Sequestrant

234. 385 Calcium disodium ethylene- diamine-tetra-acetate Antioxidant, Preservative, Sequestrant

235. 386 Disodium ethylene-diamine-tetra-acetate Antioxidant, Preservative, Sequestrant

236. 387 Oxy stearin Antioxidant, sequestrant

237. 388 Thiodiprepionic acid Antioxidant

238. 389 Dilauryl thiodipropionate Antioxidant

239. 390 Distearyl thiodipropionate Antioxidant

240. 391 Phytic acid Antioxidant

241. 399 Calcium lactobionate Stabilizer

242. 400 Alginic acid Thickener, stabilizer

243. 401 Sodium alginate Thickener, stabilizer, gelling Agent

244. 402 Potassium alginate Thickener, stabilizer

245. 403 Ammonium alginate Thickener, stabilizer

246. 404 Calcium alginate Thickener, stabilizer, gelling Agent, antifoaming
agent

247. 405 Propylene glycol alginate Thickener, emulsifier

248. 406 Agar Thickener, gelling agent, Stabilizer

249. 407 Carrageenan and its Na, K, NH4 salts (includes furcellaran) Thickener, gelling agent, Stabilizer

250. 407a Processed Euchema Seaweed (PES) Thickener, stabilizer

251. 408 Bakers yeast glycan Thickener, gelling agent, Stabilizer

252. 409 Arabinogalactan Thickener, gelling agent, Stabilizer

253. 410 Carob bean gum Thickener, Stabilizer

254. 411 Oat gum Thickener, Stabilizer

255. 412 Guar gum Thickener, Stabilizer, Emulsifier

256. 413 Tragacanth gum Thickener, Stabilizer, Emulsifier

257. 414 Gum arabic (acacia gum) Thickener, Stabilizer

258. 415 Xanthan gum Thickener, Stabilizer, emulsifier, foaming agent

259. 416 Karaya gum Thickener, Stabilizer

260. 417 Tara gum Thickener, Stabilizer

261. 418 Gellan gum Thickener, Stabilizer, gelling Agent

262. 419 Gum ghatti Thickener, Stabilizer, Emulsifier

263. 420 Sorbitol and sorbitol syrup Sweetener, Humectant, sequestrant, Texturizer,
Emulsifier

264. 421 Mannitol Sweetener, anticaking agent


510 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—SEc. 4]

1 2 3 4

265. 422 Glycerol Humectant, bodying agent

266. 424 Curd [an Thickener, Stabilizer

267. 425 Konjac flour Thickener

268. 429 Peptones Emulsifier

269. 430 Polyoxyethylene (8) stearate Emulsifier

270. 431 Polyoxyethylene (40) stearate Emulsifier

271. 432 Polyoxyethylene (20) sorbitan Monolaurate Emulsifier, dispersing agent

272. 433 Polyoxyethylene (20) sorbitan Monoleate Emulsifier, dispersing agent

273. 434 Polyoxyethylene (20) sorbitan Monopalmitate Emulsifier, dispersing agent

274. 435 Polyoxyethylene (20) sorbitan Monostearate Emulsifier, dispersing agent

275. 436 Polyoxyethylene (20) sorbitan Tristearate Emulsifier, dispersing agent

276. 440 Pectins Thickener, emulsifier, Stabilizer, gelling agent

277. 441 Superglycerinated hydrogenated rapeseed oil Emulsifier

278. 442 Ammonium salts of phosphatidic Acid Emulsifier

279. 443 Brominated vegetable oil Emulsifier, stabilizer

280. 444 Sucrose acetate isobutyrate Emulsifier, stabilizer

281. 445 Glycerol esters of wood resin Emulsifier, stabilizer

282. 446 Succistearin Emulsifier

283. 450 Diphosphates acidity regulator, texturizer, sequestrant,
stabilizer, Emulsifier, water retention Agent

284. 450(1) Disodium diphosphate acidity regulator, texturizer, sequestrant,
stabilizer, Emulsifier, water retention Agent

285. 450(ii) Trisodium diphosphate acidity regulator, texturizer, sequestrant,
stabilizer, Emulsifier, water retention Agent

286. 450(iii) Tetrasodium diphosphate acidity regulator, texturizer, sequestrant,
stabilizer, Emulsifier, water retention Agent

287. 450(iv) Dipotassium diphosphate acidity regulator, texturizer, sequestrant,
stabilizer, Emulsifier, water retention Agent

288. 450(v)  Tetrapotassium diphosphate Emulsifier, Stabilizer, acidity regulator, raising
agent Sequestrant, water retention Agent

289. 450(vi) Dicalcium diphosphate acidity regulator, texturizer, sequestrant stabilizer,
Emulsifier, water retention Agent

290. 450(vii) Calcium dihydrogen diphosphate Emulsifier, raising agent, stabilizer, sequestrant,
acidity, regulator, water retention agent

291. 450 (viii) Dimagnesium diphosphate acidity regulator, texturizer, sequestrant,
stabilizer, Emulsifier, water retention Agent

292. 451 Triphosphates Sequestrant, acidity regulator Texturizer

293. 4510) Pentasodium Sequestrant, acidity regulator, Texturizer

294. 451(ii) Pentapotassium triphosphate Sequestrant, acidity regulator, Texturizer

295. 452 Polyphosphates acidity regulator, texturizer, sequestrant stabilizer,
Emulsifier, water retention Agent

296. 452(i) Sodium polyphosphate acidity regulator, texturizer, sequestrant stabilizer,
Emulsifier, water retention Agent

297. 452(ii) Potassium Polyphosphate acidity regulator, texturizer, sequestrant stabilizer,
Emulsifier, water retention Agent

298. 452(i11) Sodium calcium polyphosphate Emulsifier, Stabilizer, acidity regulator, raising
agent, Sequestrant, water retention Agent

299. 452(iv) Calcium polyphosphates Emulsifier, Stabilizer, acidity regulator, raising
agent, Sequestrant, water retention Agent

300. 452(v) Ammonium polyphosphates Emulsifier, Stabilizer, acidity regulator, raising

agent, Sequestrant, water retention Agent


[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 511

1 2 3 4

301. 458 Gamma Cyclodextrin Stabilizer, binder

302. 459 Beta-cyclodextrin Stabilizer, binder

303. 460 Cellulose Emulsifier, dispersing agent, anticaking agent,
texturizer

304. 460G) Microcystalline cellulose Emulsifier, dispersing agent, anticaking agent

305. 460(ii) Powdered cellulose Emulsifier dispersing agent, anticaking agent

306. 461 Methyl cellulose Thickener, Emulsifier, Stabilizer

307. 462 Ethyl cellulose Binder, filler

308. 463 Hydroxypropyl cellulose Thickener, Emulsifier, Stabilizer

309. 464 Hydroxypropyl methyl cellulose Thickener, Emulsifier, Stabilizer

310. 465 Methyl ethyl cellulose Thickener antifoaming agent, Emulsifier,
stabilizer

311. 466 Sodium carboxymethyl cellulose Thickener, Emulsifier, Stabilizer

312. 467 Ethyl hydroxyethyl cellulose Thickener, Emulsifier, Stabilizer

313. 468 Croscaramellose Stabilizer, binder

314. 469 Sodium carboxymethyl] cellulose, Thickener, stabilizer

enzymatically hydrolysed

315. 470 Salts of fatty acids (with base Al, Ca, Na, Mg, K, and NH4) Emulsifier, Stabilizer, anticaking agent

316. 471 Mono-and di-glycerides of fatty acids Emulsifier, Stabilizer

317. 472a Acetic and fatty acid esters of glycerol Emulsifier, Stabilizer Sequestrant

318. 472b Lactic and fatty acid esters of glycerol Emulsifier, Stabilizer, Sequestrant

319, 472c Citric and fatty acid esters of glycerol Emulsifier, Stabilizer, Sequestrant

320. 472d Tartaric acid esters of mono and diglycerides of fatty acids Emulsifier, Stabilizer, Sequestrant

321. 472e Diacetyltartric and fatty acid ester of glycerol Emulsifier, Stabilizer, Sequestrant

322. 472f Mixed tartaric, acetic and fatty acid esters of glycerol Emulsifier, Stabilizers, Sequestrant

323. 472g Succinylated monoglycerides Emulsifier, Stabilizer, Sequestrant

324. 473 Sucrose esters of fatty acids Emulsifier, Stabilizer, Sequestrant

325. 474 Sucroglycerides Emulsifier, Stabilizer, Sequestrant

326. 475 Polyglycerol esters of fatty acid Emulsifier, Stabilizer, Sequestrant

327. 476 Polyglycerol esters of interesterified ricinoleic acid Emulsifier, Stabilizer, Sequestrant

328. 477 Propylene glycol esters of fatty Acids Emulsifier, Stabilizer, Sequestrant

329. 478 Lactylated fatty acid esters of glycerol and propylene glycol Emulsifier, Stabilizer, Sequestrant

330. 479. Thermally oxidized soya bean oil with mono-and di-glycerides Emulsifier, Stabilizer, Sequestrant

of fatty acids

331. 480 Dioctyl sodium sulphosuccinate Emulsifier, wetting agent

332. 481 Sodium lactylate Emulsifier, Stabilizer

333. 481G) Sodium stearoyl lactylates Emulsifier, Stabilizer

334. 481(ii1) Sodium oleyl lactylate Emulsifier, Stabilizer

335. 482 Calcium lactylates Emulsifier, Stabilizer

336. 4824) Calcium stearoyl lactylate Emulsifier, Stabilizer

337. 482(ii1) Calcium oleyl lactylates Emulsifier, Stabilizer

338. 483 Stearyl tartrate Flour treatment agent

339. 484 Stearyl citrate Emulsifier, sequestrant

340. 485 Sodium stearoyl fumarate Emulsifier

341. 486 Calcium stearoyl fumarate Emulsifier

342. 487 Sodium laurylsulphate Emulsifier

343. 488 Ethoxylated mono-and di-glycerides Emulsifier

344, 489 Methyl glucoside-coconut oil ester Emulsifier


512 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—SEc. 4]

1 2 3 4

345. 491 Sorbitan monostearate Emulsifier

346. 492 Sorbitan tristearate Emulsifier

347. 493 Sorbitan monolaurate Emulsifier

348. 494 Sorbitan monooleate Emulsifier

349, 495 Sorbitan monopalmitate Emulsifier

350. 496 Sorbitan trioleate Stabilizer, Emulsifier

351. 500 Sodium carbonates acidity regulator, raising agent, anticaking agent

352. 500G) Sodium carbonate acidity regluator, raising agent, anticaking agent

353. 500(ii) Sodium hydrogen carbonate acidity regulator, raising agent, anticaking agent

354. 500(ii1) Sodium sesquicarbonate acidity regulator, raising agent, anticaking agent

355. 501 Potassium carbonates acidity regulator, stabilizer

356. 501(i) Potassium carbonate acidity regulator, stabilizer

357. 501(ii) Potassium hydrogen carbonate acidity regulator, stabilizer

358. 503 Ammonium carbonates acidity regulator, raising agent

359. 503G) Ammonium carbonate acidity regulator, raising agent

360. 503(ii) Ammonium hydrogen carbonate acidity regulator, raising agent

361. 504 Magnesium carbonates acidity regulator, anticaking agent, colour
retention agent

362. 504(i) Magnesium carbonate acidity regulator, anticaking agent, colour
retention agent

363. 504(ii) Magnesium hydrogen carbonate acidity regulator, anticaking agent, colour
retention agent

364. 505 Ferrous carbonate acidity regulator

365. 507 Hydrochloric acid acidity regulator acid

366. 508 Potassium chloride gelling agent

367. 509 Calcium chloride firming agent

368. 510 Ammonium chloride flour treatment agent

369. 511 Magnesium chloride firming agent

370. 512 Stannous chloride Antioxidant, colour retention Agent

371. 513 Sulphuric acid acidity regulator

372. 514 Sodium sulphates acidity regulator

373 515 Potassium sulphates Acidity regulator

374. 516 Calcium Sulphate Dough conditioner, Sequestrant, firming agent

375. 517 Ammonium sulphate Flour treatment agent, stabilizer

376. 518 Magnesium sulphate firming agent

377. 519 Cupric sulphate colour fixative, preservative

378. 520 Aluminium sulphate firming agent

379. 521 Aluminium sodium Sulphate firming agent

380. 522 Aluminium potassium Sulphate Acidity regulator, stabilizer

381. 523 Aluminium ammonium Sulphate Stabilizer, firming agent

382. 524 Sodium hydroxide acidity regulator

383. 525 Potassium hydroxide acidity regulator

384. 526 Calcium hydroxide acidity regulator, firming agent

385. 527 Ammonium hydroxide acidity regulator

386. 528 Magnesium hydroxide acidity regulator, colour retention agent

387. 529 Calcium oxide acidity regulator, colour retention agent

388. 530 Magnesium oxide anticaking agent

389. 535 Sodium ferrocyanide anticaking agent


[art I—ave 4] ARG hl USA 3: AST 513

1 2 3 4

390. 536 Potassium ferrocyanide anticaking agent

391. 537 Ferrous hexacyanomanganate anticaking agent

392. 538 Calcium ferrocyanide anticaking agent

393. 539 Sodium thiosulphate antioxidant, sequestrant

394, 541 Sodium aluminium phosphate acidity regulator, emulsifier

395. 541(i) Sodium aluminium phosphate-acidic acidity regulator, emulsifier

396. 541(ii) Sodium aluminium phosphate-basic acidity regulator, emulsifier

397. 542 Bone phosphate (essentially calcium phosphate, tribasic) Emulsifier, anticaking agent, water retention
agent

398. 550 Sodium silicates anticaking agent

399. 5500) Sodium silicate anticaking agent

400. 550(ii) Sodium metasilicate anticaking agent

401. 551 Silicon dioxide, amorphous anticaking agent

402. 552 Calcium silicate anticaking agent

403. 553 Magnesium silicates anticaking agent, dusting Powder

404. 553(i) Magnesium silicate anticaking agent, dusting Powder

405. 553(ii) Magnesium trisilicate anticaking agent, dusting Powder

406. 553(i1i) Tale anticaking agent, dusting Powder

407. 554 Sodium aluminosilicate anticaking agent

408. 555 Potassium aluminium silicate anticaking agent

409. 556 Calcium aluminium silicate anticaking agent

410. 557 Zine silicate anticaking agent

411. 558 Bentonite anticaking agent

412. 559 Aluminium silicate anticaking agent

413. 560 Potassium silicate anticaking agent

414. 570 Fatty acids foam stabilizer, glazing agent, antifoaming agent

415. 574 Gluconic acid (D-) acidity regulator, raising agent

416. 575 Glucono delta-lactone acidity regulator, raising agent

417. 576 Sodium gluconate Sequestrant

418. 577 Potassium gluconate Sequestrant

419. 578 Calcium gluconate acidity regluator, firming agent

420. 579 Ferrous gluconate Colour retention agent

421. 580 Magnesium gluconate acidity regulator, firming agent

422. 585 Ferrous lactate colour retention agent

423. 586 4-Hexylresorcinol colour retention agent, Antioxidant

424. 620 Glutamic acid (L (+)-) flavour enhancer

425. 621 Monosodium glutamate flavour enhancer

426. 622 Monopotassium glutamate flavour enhancer

427. 623 Calcium glutamate flavour enhancer

428. 624 Monoammonium glutamate flavour enhancer

429. 625 Magnesium glutamate flavour enhancer

430. 626 Guanylic acid flavour enhancer

431. 627 Disodium 5'-guanylate flavour enhancer

432. 628 Dipotassium 5'-guanylate flavour enhancer

433. 629 Calcium 5'-guanylate flavour enhancer

434. 630 Inosinic acid flavour enhancer

435. 631 Disodium 5'-inosinate flavour enhancer


514 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—SEc. 4]
1 2 3 4

436. 632 Potassium Inosate flavour enhancer

437. 633 Calcium 5'-inosinate flavour enhancer

438. 634 Calcium 5'-ribonucleotides flavour enhancer

439. 635 Disodium 5'-ribonucleotides flavour enhancer

440. 636 Maltol flavour enhancer

441. 637 Ethyl maltol flavour enhancer

442. 638 Sodium L-Aspartate flavour enhancer

443. 639 DL-Alanine flavour enhancer

444. 640 Glycine flavour enhancer

445. 641 L-Leucine flavour enhancer

446. 642 Lysin hydrochloride flavour enhancer

447. 900a Polydimethylsiloxane antifoaming agent, anticaking agent, emulsifier
448. 900b Methylphenylpolysiloxane antifoaming agent

449. 901 Beeswax, white and yellow glazing agent, release agent

450. 902 Candeilla Wax glazing agent

451. 903 Carnaubawax glazing agent

452. 904 Shellac glazing agent

453. 905a Mineral oil, food grade glazing agent, release agent sealing agent
454. 905b Petrolatum Petroleumielly glazing agent, release agent, sealing agent
455. 905¢ Petroleum wax glazing agent, release agent, sealing agent
456. 905c(i) Microcrystallinewax glazing agent

457. 905c(i) Paraffin wax glazing agent

458. 906 Benzoin gum glazing agent

459. 907 Hydrogenated poly-1 decene glazing agent

460. 908 Rice bran wax glazing agent

461. 909 Spermaceti wax glazing agent

462. 910 Wax esters glazing agent

463. 911 Methyl esters of fatty acids glazing agent

464. 913 Lanolin glazing agent

465. 915 Glycerol-, methyl-, or penta- erithrytol esters of colophane glazing agent

466. 916 Calcium iodate flour treatment agent

467. 917 Potassium iodate flour treatment agent

468. 918 Nitrogen oxide flour treatment agent

469. 919 Nitrosyl chloride flour treatment agent

470. 920 L-Cysteine and its hydrochlorides-sodium and potassium salts flour treatment agent

471. 921 L-Cysteine and its hydrochlorides-sodium and potassium salts flour treatment agent

472. 922 Potassium persulphate flour treatment agent

473. 923 Ammonium persulphate flour treatment agent

474. 924a Potassium bromate flour treatment agent

475. 924b Calcium bromate flour treatment agent

476. 925 Chlorine flour treatment agent

477. 926 Chlorine dioxide flour treatment agent

478. 927a Azodicarbonamide flour treatment agent

479. 927b Carbamide (urea) flour treatment agent

480. 928 Benzoyl peroxide flour treatment agent, Preservative
481. 929 Acetone peroxide flour treatment agent

482. 930 Calcium peroxide flour treatment agent


[art WI—ars 4] ART bl STI 3: SATS 515

1 2 3 4

483. 938 Argon packing gas

484. 939 Helium packing gas

485. 940 Dichlorodifluoromethane Propellant, liquid freezant

486. 941 Nitrogen Packing gas, freezant

487. 942 Nitrous oxide Propellant

488. 943a Butane Propellant

489. 943b Isobutane Propellant

490. 944 Propane Propellant

491. 945 Chloropentafluoroethane Propellant

492. 946 Octafluorocyclobutane Propellant

493. 948 Oxygen packing gas

494. 950 Acesulfame potassium Sweetener, flavour enhancer

495. 951 Aspartame Sweetener, flavour enhancer

496. 952 Cyclamic acid (and Na, K, Ca Salts) Sweetener

497 953 Isomalt (isomaltitol) Sweetener, anticaking agent, bulking agent,
glazing agent

498. 954 Saccharin (and Na, K, Ca salts) Sweetener

499. 955 Sucralose (trichlorogalactosucrose) Sweetener

500. 956 Alitame Sweetener

501. 957 Thaumatin Sweetener, flavour enhancer

502. 958 Glycyrrhizin Sweetener, flavour enhancer

503. 959 Neohesperidine dihydrochalcone Sweetener

504. 960 Stevioside Sweetener

505. 964 Polyglycitol syrup Sweetener

506. 965 Maltitol and matitol Syrup Sweetener, stabilizer, emulsifier

507. 966 Lactitol Sweetener, texturizer

508. 967 Xylitol Sweetener, humectant, stabilizer, Emulsifier,
thickener

509. 968 Erythritol Sweetener, flavour enhancer, Humectant

510. 999 Qulillaia extracts foaming agent

511. 1000 Cholic acid Emulsifier

312. 1001 Choline salts and esters Emulsifier

513. 1001(i) Choline acentate Emulsifier

514. 1001(i) Choline carbonate Emulsifier

515. 1001(iii) Choline chloride Emulsifier

516. 1001{iv) Choline citrate Emulsifier

517. 1001(v) Choline tartrate Emulsifier

518. 1001{vi) Choline lactate Emulsifier

519. 1100 Amylases flour treatment agent

520. 1101 Proteases flour treatment agent, stabilizer, tenderizer,
flavour enhancer

521. 1101{i) Protease flour treatment agent, stabilizer, tenderizer,
flavour enhancer

522 1101(ii) Papain flour treatment agent, stabilizer, tenderizer,
flavour enhancer

523 1101(iii) Bromelain flour treatment agent, stabilizer, tenderizer,
flavour enhancer

524 1101(iv) Ficin flour treatment agent, stabilizer, tenderizer,

flavour enhancer


516 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—SEc. 4]
1 2 3 4
525 1102 Glucose oxidase Antioxidant
526 1103 Invertases Stabilizer
527 1104 Lipases flavour enhancer
528 1105 Lysozyme Preservative
529 1200 Polydextroses A and N bulking agent, stabilizer, thickener, Humectant
texturizer
330 1201 Polyvinylpyrrolidone bodying agent, stabilizer, clarifying agent,
dispersing Agent
331 1202 Polyvinylpolypyrrolidone colour stabilizer, colloidal, Stabilizer
3532 1503 Castor oil release agent
3533 1505 Triethyl citrate foam stabilizer
534 1518 Triacetin Humectant
335 1520 Propylene glycol Humectant, Wetting agent, dispersing agent
536 1521 Polyethylene glycol antifoaming agent
Supplementary List-Modified Starches
537 1400 Dextrins, roasted starch white and yellow Stabilizer, thickener, binder
538 1401 Acid-treated starch Stabilizer, thickener, binder
539 1402 Alkaline treated starch Stabilizer, thickener, binder
540 1403 Bleached starch Stabilizer, thickener, binder
541 1404 Oxidised starch Stabilizer, thickener, binder
542 1405 Starches, enzyme-treated Thickener
543 1410 Monostarch phosphate Stabilizer, thickener, binder
544 1411 Distarch glycerol Stabilizer, thickener, binder
545 1412 Distarch phosphate esterified with sodium trimetaphosphate; Stabilizer, thickener, binder
546 1413 Phosphated distarch phosphate Stabilizer, thickener, binder
547 1414 Acetylated distarch phosphate Emulsifier, thickener, binder
548 1420 Starch acetate esterified with Acetic anhydride Stabilizer, thickener
549 1421 Starch acetate esterified with vinyl acetate Stabilizer, thickener
550 1422 Acetylated distarch adipate Stabilizer, thickener, binder, Emulsifier
3551 1423 Acetylated distarch glycord Stabilizer, thickener
552 1440 Hydroxypropyl starch Stabilizer, thickener, binder, Emulsifier
553 1442 Hydroxypropyl distarch phosphate Stabilizer, thickener
554 1443 Hydroxypropyl distarch Stabilizer, thickener
555 1450 Starch sodium octenyl succinate Stabilizer, thickener, binder
B.List sorted in alphabetical Order-
S1.No. INS Food Additive Name Technical functions
Number
1. 370 1,4-Heptonolactone acidity regulator, sequestrant
2. 586 4-Hexylresorcinol colour retention agent, Antioxidant
3. 950 Acesulfame potassium Sweetener, flavour enhancer
4. 260 Acetic acid, glacial Preservative, acidity regulator
5. 472a Acetic and fatty acid esters of Glycerol Emulsifier, Stabilizer, Sequestrant
6. 929 Acetone peroxide flour treatment agent
7. 355 Adipic acid Acidity regulator
8. 406 Agar Thickener, gelling agent, Stabilizer
9. 400 Alginic acid Thickener, stabilizer
10. 956 Alitame Sweetener


[art I—ave 4] ARG hl USA 3: AST 517

1 2 3 4

11. 103 Alkanet Colour

12. 129 Allurared AC Colour

13. 307 Alpha-tocopherol Antioxidant

14. 173 Aluminium Colour

15. 523 Aluminium ammonium sulphate Stabilizer, firming agent

16. 522 Aluminium potassium sulphate acidity regulator, stabilizer

17. 559 Aluminium sodium silicate anticaking agent

18. 521 Aluminium sodium sulphate firming agent

19. 520 Aluminium sulphate firming agent

20. 123 Amaranth Colour

21. 264 Ammonium acetate Acidity regulator

22. 359 Ammonium adipates Acidity regulator

23. 403 Ammonium alginate Thickener, stabilizer

24. 503(i) Ammonium carbonate acidity regulator, raising agent

25. 503 Ammonium carbonates acidity regulator, raising agent

26. 510 Ammonium chloride flour treatment agent

27. 380 Ammonium citrates Acidity regulator

28. 368 Ammonium fumarate Acidity regulator

29. 503(ii) Ammonium hydrogen carbonate acidity regulator, raising agent

30. 527 Ammonium hydroxide Acidity regulator

31. 328 Ammonium lactate acidity regulator, flour treatment agent

32. 349 Ammonium malate Acidity regulator

33. 923 Ammonium persulphate flour treatment agent

34. 342 Ammonium phosphates acidity regulator, flour treatment agent

35. 452(v) Ammonium polyphosphates emulsifier raising agent, stabilizer sequestrant,
Acidity regulator, water retention agent

36. 442 Ammonium salts of phosphatidic Acid Emulsifier

37. 517 Ammonium sulphate flour treatment agent, stabilizer

38. 1100 Amylases flour treatment agent

39. 160b Annatto extracts Colour

40. 323 Anoxomer Antioxidant

41. 163G) Anthocyanins Colour

42. 163 Anothocyanins Colour

43. 409 Arabinogalactan Thickener, gelling agent, Stabilizer

44. 938 Argon packing gas

45. 300 Ascorbic acid(L-) Antioxidant

46. 304 Ascorbyl palmitate Antioxidant

47. 305 Ascorbyl stearate Antioxidant

48. 951 Aspartame Sweetener, flavour enhancer

49. 927a Azodicarbonamide flour treatment agent

50. 122 Azorubine Colour

351. 408 Bakers yeast glycan Thickener, gelling agent, Stabilizer

52. 901 Beeswax, white and yellow glazing agent, release agent

53. 162 Beet red Colour

54. 558 Bentonite anticaking agent

55. 210 Benzole acid Preservative

56. 906 Benzoin gum glazing agent


518 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—SEc. 4]

1 2 3 4

57. 928 Benzoyl peroxide flour treatment agent, Preservative

58. 160f Beta-apo-8'carotenic acid, methyl or enthyl ester Colour

59. 160e Beta-apo-Carotenal Colour

60. 160a(i) Beta-Carotene (Synthetic) Colour

61. 459 Beta-cyclodextrin Stabilizer, binder

62. 163(4i1) Blackcurrant extract Colour

63. 542 Bone phosphate (essentially calcium phosphate, tribasic) Emulsifier, anticaking agent, water retention
agent

64. 151 Brilliant black PN Colour

65. 133 Brilliant blue FCF Colour

66. 1101(iii) Bromelain flour treatment agent, stabilizer, tenderizer,
flavour enhancer

67. 443 Brominated vegetable oil Emulsifier, stabilizer

68. 154 Brown FK Colour

69. 155 Brown HT Colour

70. 943a Butane Propellant

71. 320 Butylated hydroxyanisole Antioxidant

72. 321 Butylated hydroxytoluene Antioxidant

73. 629 Calcium 5'-guanylate flavour enhancer

74. 633 Calcium 5' -inosinate flavour enhancer

75. 634 Calcium 5' -ribonucleotides flavour enhancer

76. 263 Calcium acetate Preservative, stabilizer, acidity Regulator

77. 404 Calcium alginate Thickener, Stabilizer, gelling agent, antifoaming
agent

78. 556 Calcium aluminium silicate anticaking agent

79. 302 Calcium ascorbate Antioxidant

80. 213 Calcium benzoate Preservative

81. 924b Calcium bromate flour treatment agent

82. 170G) Calcium carbonate anticaking agent

83. 170 Calcium carbonate Surface colourant, anticaking agent, stabilizer

84. 509 Calcium chloride firming agent

85. 333 Calcium citrates acidity regulator, firming agent, Sequestrant

86. 450 (vii) Calcium dihydrogen diphosphate emulsifier, raising agent, stabilizer sequestrant,
acidity regulator water retention agent

87. 385 Calcium disodium ethylene- diamine-tetra-acetate Antioxidant, Preservative, Sequestrant

88. 538 Calcium ferrocyanide anticaking agent

89. 238 Calcium formate Preservative

90. 367 Calcium fumarates Acidity regulator

91. 578 Calcium gluconate acidity regulator, firming agent

92. 623 Calcium glutamate flavour enhancer

93. 383 Calcium Thickener, gelling agent, Stabilizer

94. 170 (ii) Calcium hydrogen carbonate anticaking agent

95. 352 (i) Calcium hydrogen malate Acidity regulator

96. 227 Calcium hydrogen Preservative, antioxidant

97. 526 Calcium hydroxide acidity regulator, firming agent

98. 916 Calcium iodate flour treatment agent

99. 318 Calcium isoascorbate Antioxidant

100. 327 Calcium lactate acidity regulator, flour treatment agent


[art I—ave 4] ARG hl USA 3: AST 519

1 2 3 4

101. 399 Calcium lactobionate Stabilizer

102. 482 Calcium lactylates Emulsifier, stabilizer

103. 352 Gi) Calcium malate Acidity regulator

104. 352 Calcium malates Acidity regulator

105. 482 Gi) Calcium oleyl lactylate Emulsifier, stabilizer

106. 529 Calcium oxide acidity regulator, colour retention agent

107. 930 Calcium peroxide flour treatment agent

108. 341 Calcium phosphates acidity regulator, flour treatment agent, firming
agent, Texturizer, raising agent, anticaking agent,
water retention agent

109. 452 (iv) Calcium polyphosphates Emulsifier, Stabilizer, acidity regulator, raising
agent, Sequestrant, water retention Agent

110. 282 Calcium propionate Preservative

111. 552 Calcium silicate anticaking agent

112. 203 Calcium sorbate Preservative

113. 486 Calcium stearoyl fumarate Emulsifier

114. 482 G@) Calcium stearoyl lactylate Emulsifier, stabilizer

115. 516 Calcium sulphate flour treatment agent, Sequestrant, firming agent

116. 226 Calcium sulphite preservative, antioxidant

117. 354 Calcium tartrate Acidity regulator

118. 902 Candelilla wax glazing agent

119. 161g Canthaxanthin Colour

120. 150a Caramel I-plain Colour

121. 150b Caramel II-caustic sulphite process Colour

122. 150¢ Caramel III-ammonia process Colour

123. 150d Caramel IV-ammonia sulphite process Colour

124. 927b Carbamide (urea) flour treatment agent

125. 152 Carbon black (hydrocarbon) Colour

126. 290 Carbon dioxide carbonating agent, packing gas

127. 120 Carmines Colour

128. 903 Carnaubawax glazing agent

129. 410 Carob bean gum Thickener, stabilizer

130. 160a Carotenes Colour

131. 407 Carrageenan and its Na, K, Thickener, gelling agent,

NHé4 salts (includes furcellaran) Stabilizer

132. 1503 Castor oil release agent

133. 460 Cellulose Emulsifier, anticaking agent, texturizer,
dispersing agent

134. 925 Chlorine flour treatment agent

135. 926 Chlorine dioxide flour treatment agent

136. 945 Chloropentafluoroethane Propellant

137. 140 Chlorophyll Copper Colour

138. 141(i) Chlorophyll copper complex Colour

139. 141i) Chlorophyll copper complex sodium and potassium Salts Colour

140. 1000 Cholic acid Emulsifier

141. 1001(i) Choline acetate Emulsifier

142. 1001(ii) Choline carbonate Emulsifier

143. 1001(ii) Choline chloride Emulsifier


520 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—SEc. 4]

1 2 3 4

144. 1001(iv) Choline citrate Emulsifier

145. 1001(vi) Choline lactate Emulsifier

146. 1001 Choline salt and esters Emulsifier

147. 1001{v) Choline tartrate Emulsifier

148. 330 Citric acid acidity regulator, Antioxidant, Sequestrant

149. 472¢ Citric and fatty acid esters of glycerol Emlsifier, Stabilizer, Sequestrant

150. 121 Citrus red 2 Colour

151. 141 Copper chlorophylls Colour

152. 468 Croscaramellose Stabilizer, binder

153. 519 Cupric sulphate colour fixture, preservative

154. 1000) Curcumin Colour

155. 100 Curcumins Colour

156. 424 Curdlan Thickener, stabilizer

157. 952 Cyclamic acid (and Na, K, Ca Salts) Sweetener

158. 265 Dehydroacetic acid Preservative

159. 472e Diacetyltartaric and fatty acid esters of glycerol Emulsifier, Stabilizer, Sequestrant

160. 342i) Diammonium orthophosphate acidity regulator, flour treatment agent

161. 450 (vi) Dicalcium diphosphate Emulsifier, Stabilizer, acidity regulator, raising
agent, Sequestrant, water retention Agent

162. 341(ii) Dicalcium orthophosphate acidity regulator, flour treatment agent, firming
agent, Texturizer

163. 940 Dichlorodifluoromethane Propellant, liquid freezant

164. 389 Dilauryl thiodipropionate Antioxidant

165. 450 (viii) Dimagnesium diphosphate emulsifier raising agent, stabilizer sequestrant,
acidity regulator, water retention agent

166. 343(ii) Dimagnesium acidity regulator, anticaking Agent

167. 242 Dimethyl dicarbonate Preservative

168. 480 Dioctyl sodium sulphosuccinate Emulsifier, wetting agent

169. 230 Diphenyl Preservative

170. 450 Diphosphates Emulsifier, Stabilizer, acidity regulator, raising
agent, Sequestrant, water retention Agent

171. 628 Dipotassium 5'-guanylate flavour enhancer

172. 450(iv) Dipotassium diphosphate Emulsifier, Stabilizer, acidity, regulator, raising
agent, Sequestrant, water retention Agent

173. 340(ii) Dipotassium orthophosphate acidity regulator texturizer, sequestrant, stabilizer,
emulsifier water retention agent

174. 336(ii) Dipotassium tartrate Stabilizer, sequestrant

175. 627 Disodium 5'-guanylate flavour enhancer

176. 631 Disodium 5'-inosinate flavour enhancer

177. 635 Disodium 5'-ribonucleotides flavour enhancer

178. 450G) Disodium diphosphate Emulsifier, Stabilizer, acidity regulator, raising
agent, Sequestrant, water retention Agent

179. 386 Disodium ethylene-diamine-tetra -acetate Antioxidant, Preservative, Sequestrant

180. 331(ii) Disodium monohydrogen citrate acidity regulator, stabilizer, Sequestrant, emulsifier

181. 339(ii) Disodium orthophosphate acidity regulator, Sequestrant, emulsifier,
Texturizer, Stabilizer, water retention agent

182. 335(ii) Disodium tartrate Stabilizer, sequestrant

183. 364(ii) Disodium succinate acidity regulator, flavour Enhancer

184. 390 Distearyl thiodipropionate Antioxidant


[art II—avys 4] ART AT USI 2 SATS 521

1 2 3 4

185. 639 DL-Alanine flavour enhancer

186. 312 Dodecyl gallate Antioxidant

187. 968 Erythritol Sweetener, flavour enhancer, Humectant

188. 127 Erythrosine Colour

189. 488 Ethoxylated mono-and di-glycerides Emulsifier

190. 324 Ethoxyquin Antioxidant

191. 462 Ethyl cellulose Binder, filler

192. 313 Ethyl gallate Antioxidant

193. 467 Ethyl hydroxyethyl cellulose Thickener, emulsifier, stabilizer

194. 637 Ethyl maltol flavour enhancer

195. 214 Ethyl-p-hydroxybenzoate Preservative

196. 143 Fast green FCF Colour

197. 570 Fatty acids foam stabilizer, glazing agent, antifoaming agent

198. 381 Ferric ammonium citrate anticaking agent

199. 505 Ferrous carbonate Acidity regulator

200. 579 Ferrous gluconate Colour retention agent

201. 537 Ferrous hexacyanomanganate anticaking agent

202. 585 Ferrous lactate Colour retention agent

203. 1101(iv) Ficin flour treatment agent, stabilizer, tenderizer,
flavour enhancer

204. l6la Flavoxanthin Colour

205. 240 Formaldehyde Preservative

206. 236 Formic acid Preservative

207. 297 Fumaric acid Acidity regulator

208. 458 Gamma Cyclodextrin Stabilizer, binder

209. 164 Gardenia yellow Colour

210. 418 Gellan gum Thickener, stabilizer, gelling Agent

211. 574 Gluconic acid (D-) acidity regulator, raising agent

212. 575 Glucono delta-lactone acidity regulator, raising agent

213. 1102 Glucose oxidase Antioxidant

214. 620 Glutamic acid (L(+)-) flavour enhancer

215. 422 Glycerol Humectant, bodying agent

216. 445 Glycerol esters of wood resin Emulsifier, stabilizer

217. 915 Glycerol-, methyl-, or penta- erithrytol esters of colophane Glazing agent

218. 640 Glycine Flavour modifier

219. 958 Glycyrrhizin Sweetener, flavour enhancer

220. 175 Gold Colour

221. 163 (ii) Grape skin extract Colour

222. 142 Green § Colour

223. 314 Guaiac resin Antioxidant

224. 626 Guanlic acid flavour enhancer

225. 412 Guar gum Thickener, stabilizer

226. 414 Gum arabic (acacia gum) Thickener, stabilizer

227. 419 Gum ghatti Thickener, stabilizer, emulsifier

228. 241 Gum guaicum Preservative

229. 939 Helium packing gas

230. 209 Heptyl-p-hydroxybenzoate Preservative


522 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—SEc. 4]

1 2 3 4

231. 239 Hexamethylene tetramine Preservative

232. 507 Hydrochloric acid Acidity regulator

233. 907 Hydrogenated poly-1-decene glazing agent

234. 463 Hydroxypropyl cellulose Thickener, Emulsifier, Stabilizer

235. 464 Hydroxypropyl methyl cellulose Thickener, Emulsifier, Stabilizer

236. 132 Indigotine Colour

237. 630 Inosinic acid flavour enhancer

238. 1103 Invertases Stabilizer

239. 172 Gi) Iron oxide, black Colour

240. 172(ii) Iron oxide, red Colour

241. 172(iii) Iron oxide, yellow Colour

242. 172 Iron oxides Colour

243. 315 Isoascorbic acid Antioxidant

244. 943b Isobutane Propellant

245. 953 Isomalt (isomaltitol) Sweetener, anticaking agent, bulking agent,
glazing agent

246. 384 Isopropyl citrates Antioxidant, Preservative, Sequestrant

247. 416. Karaya gum Thickener, stabilizer

248. 425 Lonjac flour Thickener

249. 16l1c Kryptoxanthin Colour

250. 920 L-Cysteine and its hydrochlorides-sodium and potassium salts flour treatment agent

251. 921 L-Cysteine and its hydrochlorides-sodium and potassium salts flour treatment agent

252. 641 L-Leucine flavour modifier.

253. 270 Lactic acid (L-, D- and DI-) Acidity regulator

254. 472b Lactic and fatty acid esters of glycerol Emulsifier, stabilizer,

255. 966 Lactitol Sweetener, texturizer

256. 478 Lactylated fatty acid esters of glycerol and propylene glycol Emulsifier

257. 913 Lanolin glazing agent

258. 344 Lecithin citrate Preservative

259. 322 Lecithins Antioxidant, emulsifier

260. 1104 Upases flavour enhancer

261. 180 Lithol rubine BK Colour

262. 161b Lutein Colour

263. 160d Lucopene Colour

264. 642 Lysin hydrochloride flavour enhancer

265. 1105 Lysozyme Preservative

266. 504(1) Magnesium carbonate acidity regulator, anticaking agent, colour
retention agent

267. 504 Magnesium carbonates acidity regulator, anticaking agent, colour
retention agent

268. 511 Magnesium chloride firming agent

269. 345 Magnesium citrate Acidity regulator

270. 580 Magnesium gluconate acidity regulator, firming agent

271. 625 Magnesium glutamate flavour enhancer

272. 504i) Magnesium hydrogen carbonate acidity regulator, anticaking agent, colour
retention agent

273. 528 Magnesium hydroxide acidity regulator, colour retention agent

274. 329 Magnesium lactate (D-, L-) acidity regulator, flour treatment agent


[art I—ave 4] ARG hl USA 3: AST 523

1 2 3 4

275. 530 Magnesium oxide anticaking agent

276. 343 Magnesium phosphates acidity regulator, anticaking Agent

277. 553(i) Magnesium silicate anticaking agent, dusting Powder

278. 553 Magnesium Silicates anticaking agent, dusting Powder

279. 518 Magnesium sulphate firming agent

280. 553(ii) Magnesium trisilicate anticaking agent, dusting Powder

281. 296 Malic acid (D-,L-) acidity regulator, flavouring Agent

282. 965 Maltitol and maltitol Syrup Sweetener, Stabilizer, Emulsifier

283. 636 Maltol flavour enhancer

284. 130 Manascorubin Colour

285. 421 Mannitol Sweetener, anticaking agent

286. 353 Metatartaric acid Acidity regulator

287. 461 Methyl cellulose Thickener, Emulsifier, Stabilizer

288. 911 Methyl esters of fatty acids glazing agent

289. 465 Methyl ethyl cellulose Thickener, Emulsifier, stabilizer, antifoaming
agent

290. 489 Methyl glucoside-coconut oil ester Emulsifier

291. 218 Methyl p-hydroxybenzoate Preservative

292. 900 b Methylphenylpolysiloxane antifoaming agent

293. 460(i) Microcrystalline cellulose Emulsifier, anticaking agent, texturizer,
dispersing agent

294. 905 ¢ (i) Microcrystalline wax glazing agent

295. 905a Mineral oil, food grade glazing agent, release agent, sealing agent

296. 472 f Mixed tartaric, acetic and fatty acid esters of glycerol Emulsifier, Stabilizer, Sequestrant

297. 306 Mixed tocopherols concentrate Antioxidant

298. 471 Mono-and di-glycerides of fatty acids Emulsifier, stabilizer

299. 624 Monoammonium glutamate flavour enhancer

300. 342 Gj) Monoammonium orthophosphate acidity regulator, flour treatment agent

301. 341 (1) Monocalcium orthophosphate acidity regulator, texturizer, flour treatment
agent, raising Agent

302. 343 (ij) Monomagnesium orthophosphate acidity regulator, anticaking Agent

303. 622 Monopotassium glutamate flavour enhancer

304. 340 Gj) Monopotassium orthophosphate acidity regulator texturizer, sequestrant stabilizer,
emulsifier, water retention Agent

305. 336 (4) Monopotassium tartrate Stabilizer, sequestrant

306. 621 Monosodium glutamate flavour enhancer

307. 339 (i) Monosodium orthophosphate acidity regulator texturizer, sequestrant stabilizer,
emulsifier, water retention Agent

308. 364 (i) Monosodium succinate acidity regulator, flavour Enhancer

309. 335 Gj) Monosodium tartrate Stabilizer, sequestrant

310. 160a (ii) Natural extracts Colour

311. 959 Neohesperidine dihydrochalcone Sweetener

312. 375 Nicotinic acid Colour retention agent

313. 234 Nisin Preservative

314. 941 Nitrogen packing gas, freezant

315. 918 Nitrogen oxides flour treatment agent

316. 919 Nitrosyl chloride flour treatment agent

317. 942 Nitrous oxide Propellant


524 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—SEc. 4]

1 2 3 4

318. 411 Oat gum Thickener, stabilizer

319. 946 Octafluorocyclobutane Propellant

320. 311 Octyl gallate Antioxidant

321. 182 Orchil Colour

322. 231 Ortho-phenylphenol Preservative

323. 338 Orthophosphoric acid acidity regulator, antioxidant, Synergist

324. 948 Oxygen packing gas

325. 387 Oxy stearin Antioxidant, sequestrant

326. 1101(i) Papain flour treatment agent, Stabilizer, tenderizer,
flavour

327. 160c Paprika oleoresins Colour

328. 905 c (ii) Paraffin wax glazing agent

329. 131 Patent blue V Colour

330. 440 Pectins Thickener, Stabilizer, gelling Agent

331. 451 (ii) Pentapotassium triphosphate Sequestrant, acidity regulator, Texturizer

332. 451 (ij) Pentasodium triphosphate Sequestrant, acidity regulator, Texturizer

333. 429 Peptones Emulsifier

334. 905 b Petrolatum (petroleum jelly) glazing agent, release agent, sealing agent

335. 905 ¢ Petroleum wax glazing agent, release agent, sealing agent

336. 391 Phytic acid Antioxidant

337. 235 Pimaricin (natamycin) Preservative

338. 1200 Polydextroses A and N bulking agent, Stabilizer, thickener, Humectant,
texturizer

339. 990a Polydimethylsiloxane antifoaming agent, anticaking agent, emulsifier

340. 1521 Polyethylene glycol antifoaming agent

341. 475 Polyglycerol esters of fatty acids Emulsifier

342. 476 Polyglycerol esters of interesterified Ricinoleic acid Emulsifier

343. 964 Polyglycitol syrup Sweetener

344, 432 Polyoxyethylene (20) sorbitan monolaurate Emulsifier, dispersing agent

345. 433 Polyoxyethylene (20) sorbitan Mono-oleate Emulsifier, dispersing agent

346. 434 Polyoxyethylene (20) sorbitan monopalmitate Emulsifier, dispersing agent

347. 435 Polyoxyethylene (20) sorbitan monostearate Emulsifier, dispersing agent

348. 436 Polyoxyethylene (20) sorbitan tristearate Emulsifier, dispersing agent

349. 431 Polyoxyethylene (40) stearate Emulsifier

350. 430 Polyoxyethylene (8) stearate Emulsifier

351. 452 Polyphosphates Emulsifier, Stabilizer, acidity regulator, raising
agent, Sequestrant, water retention Agent

352. 1202 Polyvinylpolypyrrolidone colour stabilizer, Colloidal, Stabilizer

353. 1201 Polyvinylpyrrolidone bodying agent, Stabilizer, clarifying agent,
dispersing Agent

354. 124 Ponceau 4R Colour

355. 125 Ponceau SX Colour

356. 261 (4) Potassium acetate Preservative, acidity regulator

357. 261 Potassium acetates Preservative, acidity regulator

358. 357 Potassium adipates Acidity regulator

359. 402 Potassium alginate Thickener, stabilizer

360. 555 Potassium aluminium silicate anticaking agent

361. 303 Potassium ascorbate Antioxidant


[art I—ave 4] ARG hl USA 3: AST 525

1 2 3 4

362. 212 Potassium benzoate Preservative

363. 228 Potassium bisulphite Preservative, antioxidant

364. 9244 Potassium bromate flour treatment agent

365. 501 (i) Potassium carbonate acidity regulator, stabilizer

366. 501 Potassium carbonates acidity regulator, stabilizer

367. 508 Potassium chloride Gelling agent

368. 332 Potassium citrates acidity regulator, Sequestrant, Stabilizer

369. 261 (ii) Potassium diacetate Preservative, acidity regulator

370. 332 (i) Potassium dihydrogen citrate acidity regulator, Sequestrant, Stabilizer

371. 536 Potassium ferrocyanide anticaking agent

372. 366 Potassium fumarates Acidity regulator

373. 577 Potassium gluconate Sequestrant

374. 501 (ii) Potassium hydrogen carbonate acidity regulator, stabilizer

375. 351 (i) Potassium hydrogen malate Acidity regulator

376. 525 Potassium hydroxide Acidity regulator

377. 632 Potassium Inosate flavour enhancer

378. 917 Potassium iodate flour treatment agent

379. 317 Potassium isoascorbate Antioxidant

380. 326 Potassium lactate Antioxidant, synergist, acidity Regulator

381. 351 (ii) Potassium malate Acidity regulator

382. 351 Potassium malates Acidity regulator

383. 224 Potassium metabisulphite Preservative, antioxidant

384, 252 Potassium nitrate Preservative, colour fixative

385. 249 Potassium nitrite Preservative, colour fixative

386. 922 Potassium persulphate flour treatment agent

387. 340 Potassium phosphates acidity regulator, Sequestrant, emulsifier,
Texturizer, Stabilizer, water retention agent

388. 452 (ii) Potassium polyphosphate Emulsifier, Stabilizer, acidity regulator, raising
agent, Sequestrant, water retention Agent

389. 283 Potassium propionate Preservative

390. 560 Potassium silicate anticaking agent

391. 337 Potassium sodium tartrate Stabilizer, sequestrant

392. 202 Potassium sorbate Preservative

393. 515 Potassium sulphates Acidity regulator

394, 225 Potassium sulphite Preservative, antioxidant

395. 336 Potassium tartrates Stabilizer, sequestrant

396. 460 (ii) Powdered cellulose Emulsifier, anticaking agent, texturizer,
dispersing agent

397. 407 a Processed Euchema seaweed Thickener, stabilizer

398. 944 Propane Propellant

399, 280 Propionic acid Preservative

400. 310 Propyl gallate Antioxidant

401. 216 Propyl p-hydroxybenzoate Preservative

402. 1520 Propylene glycol Humectant, wetting agent, dispersing agent

403. 405 Propylene glycol alginate Thickener, emulsifier

404. 477 Propylene glycol esters of fatty acids Emulsifier

405. 1101 (i) Protease flour treatment agent, Stabilizer, tenderizer,

flavour Enhancer


526 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—SEc. 4]

1 2 3 4

406. 1101 Proteases flour treatment agent, Stabilizer, tenderizer,
flavour Enhancer

407. 999 Quillaia extracts foaming agent

408. 104 Quinoline yellow Colour

409. 128 Red 2G Colour

410. 161 f Rhodoxanthin Colour

411. 101 (i) Riboflavin Colour

412. 101 Gi) Riboflavin 5' -phosphate, sodium Colour

413. 101 Riboflavins Colour

414. 908 Rice bran wax glazing agent

415. 161d Rubixanthin Colour

416. 954 Saccharin (and Na, K, Ca salts) Sweetener

417. 470 Salts of fatty acids (with base Al, Ca, Na, Mg, K and NH4) Emulsifier, Stabilizer, anti caking agent

418. 166 Sandalwood Colour

419. 904 Shellac glazing agent

420. 551 Silicon dioxide, amorphous anticaking agent

421. 174 Silver Colour

422. 262 (i) Sodium acetate Preservative, acidity regulator, Sequestrant

423. 262 Sodium acetates Preservative, acidity regulator, Sequestrant

424. 356 Sodium adipates Acidity regulator

425. 401 Sodium alginate Thickener, Stabilizer, gelling Agent

426. 541 Sodium aluminium phosphate acidity regulator, emulsifier

427. 541 Gi) Sodium aluminium phosphate-acidic acidity regulator, emulsifier

428. 541 (ii) Sodium aluminium phosphate-basic acidity regulator, emulsifier

429. 554 Sodium alumino-silicate anticaking agent

430. 301 Sodium ascorbate Antioxidant

431. 211 Sodium benzoate Preservative

432. 452 (ii) Sodium calcium polyphosphate Emulsifier, Stabilizer, acidity regulator, raising
agent, Sequestrant, water retention Agent

433. 500(i) Sodium carbonate acidity regulator, raising agent, anticaking agent

434. 500 Sodium carbonates acidity regulator, raising agent, anticaking agent

435. 466 Sodium carboxymethyl cellulose Thickener, Emulsifier, Stabilizer

436. 469 Sodium carboxymethyl, cellulose, enzymatically, hydrolysed Thickener, stabilizer

437. 331 Sodium citrates acidity regulator, Sequestrant, emulsifier,
stabilizer

438. 266 Sodium dehydroacetate Preservative

439. 262 (ii) Sodium diacetate Preservative, acidity regulator, Sequestrant

440. 331 G) Sodium dihydrogen citrate acidity regulator, Sequestrant, emulsifier,
stabilizer

441. 215 Sodium ethyl p-hydroxybenzoate Preservative

442. 535 Sodium ferrocyanide anticaking agent

443. 237 Sodium formate Preservative

444, 365 Sodium fumarates Acidity regulator

445. 576 Sodium gluconate Sequestrant

446. 500 (ii) Sodium hydrogen carbonate acidity regulator, raising agent, anticaking agent

447. 350 (i) Sodium hydrogen malate acidity regulator, humectant

448. 222 Sodium hydrogen sulphite Preservative, antioxidant

449, 524 Sodium hydroxide Acidity regulator


[art WI—ars 4] ARG hl USA 3: AST 527

1 2 3 4

450. 316 Sodium isoascorbate Antioxidant

451. 638 Sodium L-Aspartate flavour enhancer

452. 325 Sodium lactate antioxidant synergist, Humectant, bulking agent

453. 481 Sodium lactylates Emulsifier, stabilizer

454. 487 Sodium laurylsulphate Emulsifier

455. 350 (ii) Sodium malate acidity regulator, humectant

456. 350 Sodium malates acidity regulator, humectant

457, 223 Sodium metabisulphite Preservative, bleaching agent, Antioxidant

458. 550 (ii) Sodium metasilicate anticaking agent

459. 219 Sodium methyl p-hydroxybenzoate Preservative

460. 251 Sodium nitrate Preservative, colour fixative

461. 250 Sodium nitrite Preservative, colour fixative

462. 232 Sodium o-phenylphenol Preservative

463. 481 (ii) Sodium oleyl lactylate Emulsifier, stabilizer

464. 339 Sodium phosphates acidity regulator, Sequestrant, emulsifier,
Texturizer, Stabilizer, water retention agent

465. 452 (i) Sodium polyphosphate Emulsifier, Stabilizer, acidity regulator, raising
agent, Sequestrant, water retention Agent

466. 281 Sodium propionate Preservative

467. 217 Sodium propyl p-hydroxybenzoate Preservative

468. 500 (iii) Sodium sesquicarbonate acidity regulator, raising agent, anticaking agent

469. 550 (i) Sodium silicate anticaking agent

470. 550 Sodium silicates anticaking agent

471. 201 Sodium sorbate Preservative

472. 485 Sodium stearoyl fumarate Emulsifier

473. 481 (4) Sodium stearoyl lactylate Emulsifier, stabilizer

474. 514 Sodium sulphates Acidity regulator

475. 221 Sodium sulphite Preservative, antioxidant

476. 335 Sodium tartrates Stabilizer, sequestrant

477. 539 Sodium thiosulphate Antioxidant, sequestrant

478. 200 Sorbic acid Preservative

479. 493 Sorbitan monolaurate Emulsifier

480. 494 Sorbitan mono-oleate Emulsifier

481. 495 Sorbitan monopalmitate Emulsifier

482. 491 Sorbitan monostearate Emulsifier

483. 496 Sorbitan trioleate Stabilizer, emulsifier

484. 492 Sorbitan tristearate Emulsifier

485. 420 Sorbitol and sorbitol syrup Sweetener, Humectant, sequestrant, Texturizer,
Emulsifier

486. 909 Spermacetic wax glazing agent

487. 512 Stannous chloride Antioxidant, colour retention agent

488. 484 Stearyl citrate Emulsifier, sequestrant

489. 483 Stearyl tartrate flour treatment agent

490. 960 Stevioside Sweetener

491. 363 Succinic acid Acidity regulator

492. 472g Succinylated monoglycerides Emulsifier, Stabilizer, Sequestrant

493. 446 Succi stearin Emulsifier

494. 955 Sucralose Sweetener


528 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—SEc. 4]

1 2 3 4

495. 474 Sucroglycerides Emulsifier

496. 444 Sucrose acetate isobutyrate Emulsifier, stabilizer

497. 473 Sucrose esters of fatty acids Emulsifier

498. 220 Sulphur dioxide Preservative, antioxidant

499. 513 Sulphuric acid acidity regulator

500. 110 Sunset yellow FCF colour

501. 441 Superglycerinated hydrogenated rapeseed oil Emulsifier

502. 309 Synthetic delta-tocopherol Antioxidant

503. 308 Synthetic gamma-tocopherol Antioxidant

504. 553 (iii) Tale anticaking agent, dusting powder

505. 181 Tannins, food grade Colour, Emulsifier, Stabilizer, thickener

506. 417 Tara gum Thickener, stabilizer

507. 334 Tartaric acid (L(+)-) acidity regulator, Sequestrant, antioxidant
synergist

508. 472d Tartaric acid esters of mono and di-glycerides of fatty acids Emulsifier, Stabilizer, sequestrant

509. 102 Tartrazine Colour

510. 319 Tertiary butylhydroquinone antioxidant

511. 450(v) Tetrapotassium diphosphate emulsifier, raising agent, stabilizer sequestrant,
acidity regulator, water retention agent

512 450 (iii) Tetrasodium diphosphate Emulsifier, Stabilizer, acidity regulator, raising
agent, Seque-strant, water retention agent

513. 957 Thaumatin Sweetener, flavour enhancer emulsifier

514. 479 Thermally oxidized soya bean oil with mono-and di-glycerides of Emulsifier

fatty acids

515. 233 Thiabendazole Preservative

516. 388 Thiodiprepionic acid antioxidant

317. 171 Titanium dioxide Colour

518. 413 Tragacanth gum Thickener, Stabilizer, emulsifier

3519. 1518 Triacetin Humectant

520. 341 (ii) Tricalcium orthophosphate acidity regulator, texturizer, flour treatment
agent, raising agent, firming agent, anticaking
agent, water retention agent

521. 1505 Triethyl citrate foam stabilizer

522. 343 (iii) Trimagnesium orthophosphate acidity regulator, anticaking Agent

523. 451 Tri phosphates Sequestrant, acidity regulator, Texturizer

524. 332 (ii) Tripotassium citrate acidity regulator, Sequestrant, Stabilizer

525. 340 (iii) Tripotassium orthophosphate acidity regulator, texturizer, sequestrant stabilizer,
Emulsifier, water retention Agent

526. 331 (ii) Trisodium citrate acidity regulator, Sequestrant, emulsifier,
Stabilizer

527. 450 (ii) Trisodium diphosphate Emulsifier, Stabilizer, acidity regulator, raising
agent, Sequestrant, water retention Agent

528. 339 (iii) Trisodium orthophosphate acidity regulator, Sequestrant, emulsifier,
Texturizer, Stabilizer, water retention agent

529. 100 (ii) Turmeric Colour

530. 153 Vegetable carbon Colour

531. 1l6le Violoxanthin Colour

532. 910 Wax esters glazing agent

533. 415 Xanthan gum Thickener, stabilizer


[art WI—ars 4] ART bl STI 3: SATS 529

1 2 3 4

534. 967 Xylitol Sweetener, Humectant, stabilizer, Emulsifier,
thickener

535. 107 Yellow 2G Colour

536. 557 Zine silicate anticaking agent Supplementary List-Modified
Starches

537. 1422 Acetylated di-starch adipate Stabilizer, thickener, binder

538. 1423 Acetylated distarch glycerol Stabilizer, thickener

539. 1414 Acetylated distarch phosphate Emulsifier, thickener

540. 1401 Acid-treated starch Stabilizer, thickener, binder

541. 1402 Alkaline treated starch Stabilizer, thickener, binder

542. 1403 Bleached starch Stabilizer, thickener, binder

543. 1400 Dextrins roasted starch white and yellow Stabilizer, thickener, binder

544. 1411 Di-starch glycerol Stabilizer, thickener, binder

545. 1412 Di-starch phosphate esterified with sodium trimetaphosphate; Stabilizer, thickener, binder

esterified with phosphorus oxychloride

546. 1443 Hydroxypropyl di-starch glycerol Stabilizer, thickener

547. 1442 Hydroxypropyl di-starch phosphate Stabilizer, thickener

548. 1440 Hydroxypropyl starch Emulsifier, thickener, binder

549. 1410 Monostarch phosphate Stabilizer, thickener, binder

550. 1404 Oxidized starch Emulsifier, thickener, binder

551. 1413 Phosphated di-starch phosphate Stabilizer, thickener, binder

552. 1420 Starch acetate esterified with acetic anhydride Stabilizer, thickener

553. 1421 Starch acetate esterified with vinyl acetate Stabilizer, thickener

554. 1450 Starch sodium octenyl succinate Stabilizer, thickener, binder,

555. 1405 Starches, enzyme-treated thickener

[F.No. 2-15015/30/2010]

V.N. GAUR,
Chief Executive Officer
