

Policy Paper
FPOs in India:
Creating Enabling Ecosystem for their Sustainability
ICAR-NATIONAL ACADEMY OF AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH MANAGEMENT
(ISO 9001:2015 CERTIFIED)
Rajendranagar, Hyderabad-500 030, Telangana, India

Recommended Citation:
Ranjit Kumar, Sanjiv Kumar, R.S. Pundir, V. Surjit, and Ch. Srinivasa Rao. (2022). FPOs in
India: Creating Enabling Ecosystem for their Sustainability. ICAR-National Academy of
Agricultural Research Management, Hyderabad, India. pp22.
Authors
Ranjit Kumar
Head, Agribusiness Management Division, ICAR-National Academy of Agricultural Research
Management (NAARM), Hyderabad
Sanjiv Kumar
Scientist, Agribusiness Management Division, ICAR-National Academy of Agricultural
Research Management (NAARM), Hyderabad
R.S. Pundir
Principal & Dean, International Agribusiness Management Institute, Anand Agricultural
University, Anand
V. Surjit
Associate Professor & Head, Centre for Agrarian Studies, National Institute of Rural
Development & Panchayati Raj (NIRDPR), Hyderabad
Ch. Srinivasa Rao
Director, ICAR-National Academy of Agricultural Research Management (NAARM),
Hyderabad
Reviewers
Dr. B. Venkateswarlu
Former Vice-Chancellor, Vasantrao Naik Marathwada Krishi Vishwa Vidhayalaya, Parbhani,
Maharashra; Former Director, ICAR-CRIDA.
Dr. Shalender Kumar
Principal Scientist, Innovation Systems for the Drylands, International Crops Research Institute
for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT), Hyderabad.
Published by:
Director
ICAR-National Academy of Agricultural Research Management
Rajendranagar, Hyderabad- 500 030, Telangana, INDIA

Executive Summary
Farmers Producers Organizations (FPOs) are considered to be one of the most imminent
tools of intervention for upliftment of the farmers’ condition in India. When more than
85 per cent of the farmers are smallholders, it becomes quite challenging for them to
access the modern production technologies, access and use the market information for
their advantage, transact the commodities in input or output market on their own
terms, and ultimately keep their farming profitable. The collectivization of farmers
through FPOs help in bringing economy of scale in different on-farm as well as off-farm
activities at all three stages- pre-production, production and post-production levels. The
Government of India is promoting the formation of FPOs through different
programmes & schemes, since last one decade. The organizations like SFAC and
NABARD have specific schemes to promote the formation of FPOs in India.
Currently, there are more than 10,000 FPOs in India registered under different legal
structure. Majority of them are registered as a company under the Companies Act,
while second largest category are under Cooperative Societies Act of respective states.
Some are also in the form of Society or Trust. The Producer Companies are designed on
‘mutual assistance principles’ and ‘patronage’ basis, to bring together desirable aspects
of the cooperative and corporate sectors for the benefit of primary producers, especially
small and marginal farmers. In several case studies/literatures, success stories have
been documented demonstrating the benefits realized by the farmer-members from the
FPOs in the form of reduced input cost and market linkage as aggregation allows better
bargaining power for the FPOs. Advisory services and value addition services offered
by the FPOs have also benefitted the farmers in timely decision making. However, there
exists many challenges for the long-term growth and viability of FPOs or when the scale
of operation increases. Majority of the FPOs are new and small in terms of number of
producer-members and their own equity capital, which makes them less attractive for
funding by the financing agencies. Lack of understanding about business plan, lack of
funding support for many FPOs, less importance towards hiring of skilled persons with
managerial abilities, poor governance structure, difficulty in regulatory compliances,
and marketing difficulties need proper attention to provide enabling ecosystem for the
FPOs.
In 2019, Government of India has announced formation of 10,000 new FPOs on cluster
basis under Central Sector Schemes (CCS). These FPOs get supported by the promoting
agency (NABARD/ SFAC/NAFED/NCDC) in terms of technical, managerial and
financial aspects. However, the challenges with the existing FPOs and/or many other
FPOs formed outside the ambit of CCS remain the same. They are not able to move to
next stage of their lifecycle to become economically viable business unit to create value
for their shareholders and the society as a large.
i | P age

To ensure the economic viability and long-term sustainability of FPOs, the present
policy paper offers following recommendations:
1. It is proposed to set up a National Board of FPO (NBFPO) on the pattern of MSME
and different commodity boards which can promote, impart necessary skills, provide
network and monitor the progress of all the FPOs.
2. There should be a provision of assured Seed Fund as one-time grant for all the
registered FPOs on pre-decided criteria. It may be done by creating Special Purpose
Vehicle (SPV) with a corpus fund entrusted with the NBFPO.
3. Customized financial products may be created with the banks for the FPOs to enable
them easy access of short-term loans at subsidized rate. The funding may be done
based on the cash flow of the FPOs, rather existing provision of asset-based financing.
4. Linking of each FPO with KVK/ agricultural university/ development
institutions: To provide continuous technical support and guidance, the FPOs should
be closely linked to any agricultural university/KVK/ICAR institutes or any other
development organization in the region, which may act as an Incubation/ Facilitation
Centre for the FPOs.
5. For regulatory compliances, a pool of empanelled chartered accountants (CAs) in
each state shall be created, who can serve the FPOs for regulatory compliances, the
expenses of which may be borne by the government during initial 3-5 years.
6. Setting up common post-harvest infrastructure facilities at district level would
encourage rural micro-entrepreneurs and reduce the burden on individual FPOs to have
their own infrastructure at initial stage.
7. The marketing problems can be addressed to certain extent by extending preferential
treatment to the FPOs in schemes like MSP-based procurement, relaxing norms of
APMC for transacting agricultural commodities, Mid-day Meal Scheme, Poshan
Abhiyan, etc.
ii | P age

Contents
Executive Summary i
1. Background 1
1.1 Genesis of Farmer Producers Organizations (FPOs) 2
2. Current status of FPOs 3
2.1. Number and distribution of FPOs in India 3
2.2. Policy ecosystem towards FPO promotion 5
3. Benefits and challenges faced by FPOs 6
3.1 Perceived benefits of FPOs 6
3.2 Benefits realized by the members 8
3.3 Challenges faced by FPOs 11
4. Way forward 13
References 19
Appendix: Government Schemes for FPOs 22



1. Background
Indian agriculture has made a the transaction costs for the producers
significant progress over last several as well as for the bulk buyers, like
decades, mainly due to improvement in processors, retailers, traders, etc.
technologies (seeds, fertilizer, plant
Earlier, farmers were brought together
protection chemicals, etc.), practices
in co-operatives to counter some of the
(line sowing, mono-cropping,
above challenges due to aggregation/
mechanization, irrigation, etc.), and
collectivization of inputs. These co-
policy environment (price support,
operatives were in the form of 3-tier
input subsidy, market infrastructure,
structure, Primary Agricultural Co-
credit, insurance, etc.). Consequently,
operative Societies (PACS) at village
the total production of food grains has
level, which were federated at district
increased by 5.6 times, fruits by 16
and state level. These co-operatives
times, vegetables by 11 times, oilseeds
mainly focussed on providing easy
by 6 times, milk by 10 times and so on in
credit and/or inputs like fertilizers and
last 70 years (1950/51 to 2019/20).
seeds to the farmer-members. Moreover,
During the same period, the number of
over the years due to in-built
farm households has also increased
governance structure, these co-
significantly, leading to fragmentation
operatives provided significantly more
of land holdings and declining size of
management control and power to local
average land holding. Currently, more
influential persons without contributing
than 85 per cent of the farmers are
to the business of the co-operatives.
smallholders cultivating on an average
Over time, they used their influence for
about 1.01 hectare of land. They own
self-serving interests, leading to in
only 47% of total cultivated area.
general disenchantment among the
According to Situation Assessment
farmer-members. Consequently, except
report (NSS 77th Round), average
for dairy sector cooperatives and to
monthly income per agricultural
some extent in sugar sector which
household is ₹10,218 only in 2018-19
became highly successful at grass root
(NSO, 2021). It becomes quite difficult
level, by-and-large cooperatives in
for individual smallholder farmers to
agriculture sector have failed. Moreover,
ensure their livelihood besides coping
Shah (2016) argued that had there been
with climate change impacts and market
such strong member-controlled
risks. Small holders do not have
cooperatives in agriculture sector, like in
enough bargaining power to negotiate
case of dairy and sugar in western India,
in input or output market in their
the agrarian distress would have been
favour. Small landholdings also increase
far less severe.
1 | P age

1.1 Genesis of Farmer Producers Organizations (FPOs)
Currently, farmer organisations in India etc. However, failure of collectivization
has various legal forms—as a Producer of farmers through co-operatives in
Company (under Companies Act, 2013), agriculture sector, growing agrarian
as a Cooperative (under Cooperative crisis and simultaneously rapid growth
Societies Act), as a Non-profit entity in private sector through corporatization
(under Companies Act, 2013) or as a led to beginning of new thinking of
Trust (under Indian Trusts Act, 1882). bringing best attributes of co-operatives
The Primary Agricultural Cooperative and the corporates together. In the year
Society (PACS) is one of the oldest 2000, the concept of producer companies
forms of producer organizations in was recommended by a committee
India. In addition to these, there are chaired by Prof. Y. K. Alagh.
many other forms of producer
In 2002, the Companies Act of 1956 was
organizations catering to specific or
amended and new section ‘Part IXA’
multiple function(s) such as self-help
was inserted for ‘Producer Companies’,
groups (SHGs), Federation of SHGs,
a new form of corporate entity (MCA,
Common Interest Groups (CIGs), Joint
n.d.). These companies were designed
Liability Groups (JLGs), Farmers’ Club,
Main Features of Companies Act Amendment (2002)
• The Producer Company can have unlimited number of shareholder members
unlike any other company or form of business but with a condition that the
member should only and only be a primary producer / farmer.
• It can operate throughout India with single registration, including exporting
business in contrast to co-operatives.
• It can enter into JVs, alliances and also have subsidiaries which is not the case
for a society.
• It can distribute its earnings back to members (need not plough back the profits
unlike Non-profit organization / Section 8 companies) in the proportion of
contribution and not necessarily as per the share holding pattern.
• Every member has one vote irrespective of number of shares held by him/her.
• An independent expert/ professional can be part of the board which is not the
case for a society.
2 | P age

on ‘mutual assistance principles’ and formation of FPOs got further boost
‘patronage1’ basis, to bring together through funding support from both the
desirable aspects of the cooperative and agencies- NABARD and SFAC.
corporate sectors for the benefit of
Apart from this, agriculture
primary producers, especially small and
departments of most of the states also
marginal farmers (Alagh, 2019).
took keen interest in aligning their
Initially, Small Farmers’ Agribusiness schemes through FPOs and in turn the
Consortium (SFAC), a Society promoted departments of agriculture, horticulture
by Ministry of Agriculture and and/or animal husbandry also got
Cooperation, Govt. of India was involved in formation and promotion of
designated as the nodal agency for FPOs. Apart from this, several FPOs are
promotion of FPOs in India. In 2013, self-promoted by progressive rural
FPO Formation Guidelines were issued youth or NGOs, while agriculture/
by Government of India and next year horticulture/animal husbandry
i.e. 2014 was declared as “Year of departments of several states are also
Farmer Producer Organizations promoting the formation of FPOs. Many
(FPOs)” by the Ministry of Agriculture, agricultural universities (SAUs) and
Government of India with special some ICAR institutes are also helping
package allocation of ₹ 200 crores to the farmers in mobilization for FPO
NABARD2 as PRODUCE Fund3 to formation through their KVKs.
promote FPOs. Consequently, the
2. Current status of FPOs
2.1. Number and distribution of FPOs in India
Several studies have been conducted by are promoted by different agencies,
many researchers in India which gave there is no single unified source of
different estimates about the total information about all the existing
number of FPOs in India. Since the FPOs registered FPOs in the country. These
1Patronage means the use of services offered by the Producer Company to its Members by participation in its
business activities.
2National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) is an apex regulatory and financing agency for the
institutions providing investment and production credit for promoting the various developmental activities in rural
areas in India.
3Producers Organization Development and Upliftment Corpus (PRODUCE) Fund of ₹ 200 crore was created with
NABARD for 2014-15 for the building and promotion of 2000 FPOs in next 2-3 years. The objective is to build,
promote and nurture FPOs by way of extending the required financial & non-financial support during the nascent/
formative stage.
3 | P age

FPOs are registered under different include non-farm producer companies
legal structure- mostly are either under as well. In case the FPO is registered as a
Companies Act or Co-operative Trust or a Society registered under
Societies Act, while some are also as section 12AA of the Act, or in the case of
Mutually Aided Cooperative Society Sec 8 Company, the income earned
(specially in Andhra Pradesh and cannot be distributed to its members.
Telangana), as Trust or Section 8 Therefore, majority of the FPOs are
company. The list of FPOs registered registered either under Companies Act
under the Companies Act4 can be found or under Cooperative Society Act. The
with the Ministry of Corporate Affairs recent report by Govil et al (2020)
(MCA), Government of India however, observed that there were 7,374
there the list includes all the producer registered Producer Companies (PCs) as
companies (PCs) registered which may on March 31, 2019.
9000
4500
8000
2500
7000
500 r
) l 6000 e b
a u 320 m
n u
n 5000 N
A
e
(
r e
2 20
40 00
v
i t
b a
m l u
u 120 m
N 3000 u
C
20
2000
5
1000
0 0
2003200620072008200920102011201220132014201520162017201820192020
Cummulative Number
Source: Authors’ estimation using data from mca.gov.in
Figure 1. Farmer Producer Companies (FPCs) incorporated with MCA
4The FPOs registered under Companies Act have their names ending with ‘Producer Company Ltd’, and are
commonly known as Farmers Producer Companies (FPCs).
4 | P age

However, from recent records of MCA, Although, several of these FPOs might
there are 9239 active Producer be in dormant stage.
Companies as on 31st Dec 2020, who are
Currently, almost 60 per cent of total
engaged in agriculture and allied
registered FPOs are located in only four
activities. It can be seen from the graph
states (Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh,
below, more than 80 per cent of these
Haryana, and Bihar), and another 30 per
PCs have been registered in last 3 years
cent in seven states (Tamil Nadu,
only. Among all the promoting agencies,
Andhra Pradesh, West Bengal,
NABARD claims to promote almost
Telangana, Odisha, Karnataka, and
5100 FPOs across different states,
Madhya Pradesh). Moreover, several
majority as Producer Companies and
studies also indicate that about 60 per
about 10-15% as Co-operative Society.
cent of them have ≤500 members.
Similarly, SFAC has registered total 897
Hardly, 10-15 per cent of FPOs have
FPCs as on 31st March 2021. Therefore,
1000+ members. Similarly, almost 50 per
we may assume that currently there are
cent of the FPOs have authorized capital
about 10,000 registered FPOs operating
up to only ₹1 lakh (Raju et al, 2016; Govil
in India in different forms and
et al, 2020).
supported by different agencies.
2.2. Policy ecosystem towards FPO promotion
For success of farmer producer initial/ formation stage. Therefore, the
organizations, they need formalization, government in recent years have
standardization, and access to credit and initiated several schemes to address
markets. The government has in recent these issues of the FPOs. The schemes
years brought in several policy are channelized through agencies like
measures to create enabling NABARD, SFAC, NCDC and others.
environment for FPO formation and The list of schemes available for
promotion. Since, by legal structure, FPO/FPCs are presented in the figure 3
producer organizations are not allowed (details are given in Appendix).
to raise capital from the equity market
Apart from above, all the development
or any other private investment,
schemes in agricultural and allied
mobilizing equity from members make
sectors currently being implemented by
the organization more patron-oriented.
Central and/or the state governments in
However, it becomes difficult for the
the country encourage the FPOs to be
smallholder farmers to contribute good
the beneficiaries of the
sum of money as equity, which can be
programmes/schemes.
helpful for the FPOs to create facilities at
5 | P age

Credit guarantee Matching equity grant
scheme by NABARD/ by NABARD/ SFAC
n
SFAC (risk coverage up a (Up to ₹25/10 lakhs)
to ₹1 crore)
o
L t n
a
r
G
Corporate tax exemption x One-time funding
a
T
(For annual turnover up support to meet
to ₹100 crore) establishment cost
Formation and Promotion of 10,000 new FPOs
▪ Assistance of ₹18 lakhs (first 3 years)
▪ Equity grant (up to ₹15 lakhs)
▪ Credit guarantee (risk coverage up to ₹2 crores)
Figure 2. Government Schemes related to financial support to the FPO
3. Benefits and challenges faced by FPOs
3.1 Perceived benefits of FPOs
Producer organisations, a member- ‘providing access to market information’
based organization is considered to be a on product prices and trends,
pathway to successfully deal with seasonality, etc.; ‘extension and
several challenges smallholder farmers educational services’ promoting
face in India. They attain a common improved production and marketing
interest through collectivisation and try practices, and building financial literacy.
to achieve economies of scale by FPO members can leverage collective
reducing transaction costs (Manaswi et strength and bargaining power to access
al., 2019). Bizikova et al. (2020) in their financial and non-financial inputs,
scoping study highlighted that farmers services and appropriate technologies,
organization provided various kinds of reduce transaction costs, tap high value
services to their members world over, markets and enter into partnerships
which may be categorized as ‘marketing with private entities on more equitable
services to facilitate product sales’ terms (Nadiia, 2011; Raju et al., 2017;
(market linkage, transportation, storage, Dey, 2018; Bizikova et al., 2020).
establishment of contract, etc.);
6 | P age

Creation of basic infrastructure like that come from higher scales of
storage and warehousing or purchase of operation at various stages of the
value addition equipment become easier agricultural value chain from pre-
through FPOs, which otherwise is not production stage of quality input
possible for individual farmers. purchase to collectivization of outputs,
Demonstration of modern technologies value addition, storage and
in agriculture, weather & crop advisory, transportation, and marketing.
market intelligence, access to quality Smallholder farmers get linked up with
farm inputs & services at cheaper rate, the financial institutions (Das and
access to credit and insurance and other Mandal, 2021). In the process, the FPOs
government schemes, etc. are some of earn from a range of activities and
the potential interventions through services. Depending upon the
which FPOs can transfer the benefits to commodities produced by the farmer-
the smallholder farmers in big way members, the FPOs can earn
(Prasad, 2019). The business activity of revenue/profit by bulk buying and
most of the FPOs promoted by selling of seeds, fertilizers, pesticides
NABARD is found to be produce and facilitating in custom hiring services
marketing, followed by input supply, of farm implements. They also earn
aggregation and processing, whereas income by way of providing primary
SFAC promoted FPOs are engaged processing (cleaning and grading)
mostly in processing, cold storage and and/or value addition and levying
custom hiring (Subhash et al., 2019). auction fee from buyers for selling the
Thus, FPOs offer the farmers advantages produce (Figure 1).
Input Supply Value Addition and Market
Linkages
(seed, fertilizers & agro-chemicals,
machinery) (processing, procurement and selling,
access to new market)
FPO
Financial and Technical Advisory Services & Networking
(credit & insurance, capacity building, (weather, market intelligence, Govt.
modern technology adoption) schemes)
Figure 3. Major activities undertaken by the FPOs
7 | P age

Such kind of information asymmetry are
In agricultural marketing, there is a long
expected to be minimized with the help
chain of intermediaries who very often
of FPOs.
work non-transparently leading to the
situation where the producer receives Thus, the impact of FPO on farmer-
only a small part of the value that the members can be grouped into six
ultimate consumer pays. Through categories: income, yield, production
aggregation, the primary producers can quality, environment, empowerment,
avail the benefit of economies of scale. and food & nutritional security. These
six categories are interrelated and one
They will also have better bargaining
leading to another. The aggregation at
power with the bulk buyers of produce
the FPO level will lead to increased
and bulk suppliers of inputs. As per
bargaining power which will help
Situation Assessment Survey conducted
farmers realizing higher income.
in the year 2019, the proportion of the
Increased income results into
farmer households selling their produce
empowerment, and food & nutritional
to government-run procurement
security at farmers’ household level. The
agencies are very low, even if they are
better agricultural practices/technology-
aware of the Minimum Support Price
led precision farming would also result
(MSP) and the procurement agency. A
into addressing environmental concerns
larger share of surplus produce is sold in the region. The role of FPO in
in open local markets. For instance, disseminating advisory services will
about 15% of paddy farmers sold their ensure increased yield and better
produce to procurement agencies, while produce quality. Apart from these,
the corresponding number for wheat FPOs are also expected to assist the
farmers was just about 10% (NSS 77th farmer-members to stabilize their
income through access to reliable
Round). At national level, 60% of the
markets, higher bargaining power with
summer paddy growing farmers, 47% of
buyers, and more stable prices through
winter paddy growing farmers and 63%
access to consistent and reliable
of wheat farmers were aware of MSP.
markets.
3.2 Benefits realized by the members
Many studies have reported the benefits FPOs. Advisory services and value
gained by the member-farmers which addition services offered by the FPOs
are mainly in the form of reduced input have also benefitted the farmers. Table
costs due to provision of input sale by 1 highlights the benefits realized by the
the FPOs; market linkage as aggregation farmers from FPOs in different parts of
allows better bargaining power for the the country.
8 | P age

Table 1: Farmers benefitting from FPOs in different states
State Member farmers’ eulogistic experience
Andhra Pradesh FPO engaged in procuring, processing, marketing, has helped
farmer getting good income (Zachariah, 2020). Provision of agri-
input, fish feed and labour has reduced the production cost along
with solving labour problems of farmers (Raju et.al., 2016).
Assam The members are availing the fish seeds and feed at a subsidized
rate and leveraging the existing government schemes to avail
inputs at a lower price. Aggregating the produce has empowered
them to bargain for better profits (Deepthi et al., 2021).
Bihar An FPC which is into maize aggregation and direct marketing,
following off-season sale has resulted into higher price realization
for member farmers (Vutukuru et al., n.d.).
Gujarat An FPC buying cumin, wheat, castor, isabgol, fenugreek, ajwain,
fennel, and mustard from farmers and participating in futures
platform for trading has resulted into nearly 20% more return to
the farmers (Dave, 2017).
Input supply and produce aggregation by the FPC has resulted
into transfer of benefits to the member farmers (Nalini et al., 2015,
Singh & Singh, 2014). Supply of agri-inputs like seeds, fertilizers,
pesticides, farm-equipment to its members for which the margins
were rather low (2 to 10%) (Astad and Sachin, 2021).
GUJPRO’s main support to its members included procurement,
and processing of groundnut, pulses and oilseeds and trading of
cumin. Marketing support to mango growers (Vandana and
Ayush, 2021).
Karnataka Member farmers of FPC could be able to get inputs at lower cost
along with reduction in labour problem shortage (Das, 2019).
Market linkage through FPO has helped the farmer members
getting better margin along with saving in other costs (RKVY,
n.d.). FPC intervention in new technology adoption has resulted
into doubling the farmers’ income (Darshan et al., 2017). Inputs
are directly procured from input dealers and sold at relatively
low prices to the member farmers (Pallavi et al., 2021).
9 | P age

Kerala Farmers are receiving higher price for the produce by selling to
the FPC (Nadiia, 2011 & Sultana, 2016).
Madhya Pradesh FPCs Tie up with ginners in case of cotton and government
procurement agencies for certified soy seed has helped the
farmers getting higher price, in addition the supply of agri-inputs
has reduced the input cost for them (Singh & Singh, 2014;
Krishisutra 2, 2013; Swati, 2016).
Input marketing support, seed production, commodity trading
and supports its members through credit linkages, infrastructure
development, and capacity building of FPO functionaries (Prasad
& Abhishek, 2021).
Selling branded seeds to their members and having forward
contracts with a few buyers for procuring cereals, pulses, spices
etc. (Abhishek, 2021).
Maharashtra FPCs providing input, produce buying and offering value
addition services to the farmers like grading, sorting and
packaging and providing market linkage has helped the farmers
increase their earnings significantly (Khan, 2021; Padmanand,
2018; Trebbin & Hassler, 2012)
Punjab Custom hiring centre of FPC helped farmers in getting costly
machines at genuine rates in addition to market linkage
(Anonymous, 2015)
Tamil Nadu Input store, custom hiring centre and advisory services of the FPC
has benefitted the member farmers in bringing down the input
cost along with reducing unnecessary fertilizer usage
(Annamalai, 2021 & Krishisutra 2, 2013)
Telangana Cotton farmer members could be able to get premium price by
selling through FPC (Nadiia P, 2011; Revathi & Sultana, 2020)
Uttar Pradesh Supply of agri-input, sale of organic, various value added
products resulted into significant increase in farmers’ income
(Khan, 2021 & Krishisutra 2, 2013)
West Bengal Market linkage created by FPC for selling vegetables has
benefitted the farmers (Majumdar, 2017)
10 | P age

3.3 Challenges faced by FPOs
It has been observed that the FPOs appropriate capacity building to
perform better when its management develop business plan and devise
systems, governance and capital strategies to extract maximum
structure are strong. Other factors like benefits from the market after
market and financial accessibility, formation of the FPOs to understand
farmer-members’ engagement plan, the intricacies of the market and
infrastructure development, better than consumers’ demand.
existing market pricing mechanism, etc.
should also be strengthened to scale up b) Poor capitalization and funding
the business of the FPOs for its long- scope
term growth and viability. Following
There is a provision of funding
challenges need proper attention to
support under various government
provide enabling ecosystem for the
schemes to the FPOs promoted by
FPOs to function:
NABARD and/or SFAC to build
capacities, technical assistance and
a) Lack of understanding about
develop innovative financial systems
business model
for sustainability of FPCs. However,
The FPOs are considered to be a
such financial assistance is not
business entity of the, for the and by
available to all the FPOs, particularly
the farmers. Entire decisions from
outside the ambit of
pre-production planning to
NABARD/SFAC. The average paid-
marketing of the produce has to be
up capital (PUC) of majority of the
done by the farmers themselves.
FPOs are between ₹1.0 to 3.0 lakhs.
Although, farmers in India are having
Due to lack of any collateral assets
rich experience in cultivation of crops
with the FPOs, financial institutions
and raising animals, however there
are hesitant to finance the FPOs,
are several issues related to
unless the latter is well-capitalized
knowledge about modern
(Nikam et al., 2019). These FPOs find
technologies, access to real time
huge challenge in managing their
information for risk management,
working capital requirements as well.
access to cheap and timely credit,
Running a business organization with
marketing of the produce at best
such small capital base is a daunting
price, value addition before
task.
marketing, etc. which mar the
expectations of the farmers for better
income realization. They need
11 | P age

c) Managerial capability also hesitate in handing over the
charge of management to
Like any other businesses, the FPOs
democratically elected person within
also require technical and managerial
the FPO. This conflict leads to poor
expertise to carry on their business
governance structure of the FPOs,
operations, including forward-
and over time other members loose
backwards linkages, bringing best
interest in participating in the
agriculture practices, seed
business of the FPOs.
production, providing value addition
services like retail services of inputs,
e) Regulatory compliances
storage, transportation and other
The FPOs registered under Producer
agricultural production services
Companies Act are currently treated
required by the small and marginal
in the same manner as any other large
farmers etc. to make their business
companies. The regulatory
operation sustainable and more
compliances like book keeping,
profitable for all shareholders. Apart
accounting, taxation, obligations of
from these, the organization also
directors of the board, etc. are highly
require other ancillary services like
demanding for the farmers, who have
credit facilitation, advisory services,
never come across such things. On
furnishing regulatory requirements,
the other hand, these compliances
etc. All these operations can be
become essential requirement to
conducted by professionally skilled
access financial support offered
persons. However, majority of the
under different government schemes.
FPOs ignore hiring such professionals
Therefore, unless complete
due to lack of financial capacity
handholding of the FPOs in these
and/or lack of awareness (Trebbin,
areas are not provided in initial years,
2014).
it would become difficult to sustain
d) Ownership and controls the operations of the FPOs.
It has also been observed that many
f) Business plan and scaling
FPOs have been formed by few
opportunities
progressive farmers or rural
A well-defined business plan is
households. These individuals have
essential element for success of any
good intent to support other
business organization. It becomes
smallholder farmers in their locality
more imminent when all the
by collectivizing the operations.
executive members are farmers, who
However, it becomes difficult for
are unskilled about different aspects
such persons to maintain balance
of any business. The business plan
between personal interest and the
provides rail-guard to the
interest of the farmer-members. They
organization to navigate within the
12 | P age

boundary and take to desired goal. It companies find FPOs as a better
also helps the FPOs to diversify and source for procurement of vegetables
scale up their business activities in which helps them cut down the
well-planned manner. Currently, procurement cost and ensure quality
majority of the FPOs lack such to a greater extent. But the practice is
business plan, and therefore they limited to few FPOs. In fact, FPOs are
limit their activity to merely bulk found to be more successful in
buying and selling of the inputs establishing backward linkages than
and/or farm produce. forward linkages like disposal of
agricultural produce in larger volume
g) Difficulties in marketing of the
(Das & Mandal, 2021). However, for
produce
long-term sustainability of the FPOs,
FPOs are being recognized on various there is a need of strong market
platforms for procurement by private linkage for the farm produce or its
companies and government agencies value-added products (Anonymous,
in few cases (Dey, 2018; Mathew, 2020).
2020; Saini, 2021; Abrar, 2022). Private
4. Way forward
The Doubling Farmers Income (DFI) conclusions that these FPOs need
Committee report propounds that the constant handholding support on at
FPO is one of the most important tools least three key fronts- managerial
for addressing several farmers’ support, financial support, and
problems and issues related to capacity building. The funding support
agricultural growth. Consequently, for existing FPOs varies widely. The
Government of India has also launched FPOs promoted by NABARD and SFAC
several supporting schemes to support get about ₹6-10 lakhs over three years,
the promotion and growth of these while other FPOs struggle to get even
farmers’ organization under different smaller amount.
legal structures. The recent Central
Therefore, following recommendations
Sector Scheme of promoting 10,000 new
are made for ensuring the economic
FPOs also allocated significant amount
viability and long-term sustainability
of budget for the activity. However, the
of FPOs in India:
challenges before the existing FPOs are
still quite large and varied. Several
studies have reached to similar
13 | P age

a) Setting up of National Board of FPO
(NBFPO): There is a need to form a National
Board for promotion of FPOs, on the pattern of
MSME (Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises)
and different commodity boards, which can
monitor the progress of all the FPOs and
provide similar support to all the FPOs
FPOs have potential to
irrespective of promoting agencies. It would
act as a catalyst of
also help in collating the information related to
change in rural economy
all the FPOs in the country, which is currently
ambiguous. Such Board through their in India. However, to
empanelled agencies would be able to provide
realize that aspiration,
technical guidance to the FPOs working at
they need initial
different levels of growth. (The broad
framework of NBFPO is given on page 15-16). handholding for
managerial capacity
b) Minimum assured seed funding support as
building as well as easy
grant: Several FPOs are located in remote areas
and do not get support from any promoting access to working
agencies like NABARD/ SFAC/ NCDC, etc.
capital.
due to geographical location or otherwise.
Therefore, there must be a provision of
minimum seed fund as one-time grant for all
the registered FPOs with pre-decided criteria
such as number of farmer-members, diversity in
Board, business plan for next 3 years, etc. The
seed fund may be in staggered manner, which
may be released based on progress on the
milestones achieved by the FPOs.
c) Special provision for working capital
finance for FPO: All the FPOs at initial stage
require working capital to conduct the business
for their members- purchasing inputs in bulk or
procuring output from them to provide market
linkage. Due to low capitalization initially, these
FPOs face huge challenge in getting institutional
credit at affordable rate to meet the working
14 | P age

capital requirements. Therefore, customized
financial products may be created for the FPOs
to enable them to access easily the short-term
loans at subsidized rate.
d) Linking of each FPO with KVK/agricultural
university/ institutions: To provide
continuous technical support, guidance and
capacity building, the FPOs should be closely
linked to any agricultural university/ KVK/
ICAR institutes or any other development
organization in the region, which may act as an
Institutional support in
Incubation/ Facilitation Centre for the FPOs.
terms of conducting There may be one representative from these
regular capacity building organizations in the Board of Directors of each
FPO to provide technical and strategic guidance
programmes for key
for future growth of the FPO. Similarly, the
executives of the FPOs,
executive members should be trained on
and by including experts different aspects of the businesses of FPO on
regular basis. For this, 2-3 agencies/ institutions
in the management team
may be identified in each state to conduct the
would strengthen the
training programmes for the FPOs’ executives.
business operations of
d) Common post-harvest infrastructure
the FPOs. It would also
facilities for FPOs: Common infrastructure
bring transparency in the
facilities like warehousing, cold-storage, sorting
governance of the FPOs. & grading, packaging, etc. may be created at
district-level, which can be used by upcoming
FPOs at initial stage on pay-and-use basis. This
will also create rural micro-entrepreneurship
opportunities and every FPOs need not to bother
about setting up such facilities at initial stage of
their lifecycle.
e) Empanelment of auditors (CAs) to facilitate
the regulatory compliances: It has been
observed that compliance norms for newly
formed FPOs/ FPCs are overwhelming for the
management board, who have never been
15 | P age

exposed to such issues before. Hiring services of
auditors at initial stage also become
burdensome for these FPOs who struggle to
generate sufficient profit to meet their essential
operational expenses. Therefore, every state
may have pool of empanelled chartered
accountants (CAs) whose services may be taken
by the FPOs for auditing and regulatory
The existing mandatory
compliances. The expenses may be borne by the
government for first 3 years or till the total regulatory compliances
turnover of the FPO/FPC reaches up to ₹50-60
appear to be big deterrent
lakhs5 annually for two consecutive years,
for many small-scale
whichever is earlier.
FPOs. These need to be
f) Preferential treatment to the FPOs: As FPOs
taken care by the state for
are facing difficulty in marketing of produce,
initial years.
the FPOs should be given preference for
procurement of agricultural commodities in all Further, FPOs may be
the government schemes, like MSP-based
given preference for
procurement, relaxing norms of APMC for
participation in
selling agricultural produce outside of APMC
mandis, Mid-day Meal Scheme, Poshan Abhiyan, government-funded
etc. It will not only ease the procurement schemes to provide
burden of identified commodities by the
market-linkage for the
government, at the same time FPOs will get an
alternative for produce disposal. FPOs can be
farm produce.
encouraged to supply food items under Mid-day
Meal Scheme to the respective agency. For this,
FPOs can be promoted for value addition of
commodities to be procured under the Mid-day
Meal Scheme. Similarly, private manufacturers of
fertilizers and agro-chemicals may be nudged to
encourage direct engagement with the FPOs.
5 Assuming the FPOs earns 10% gross margin on the total turnover, the total income of the FPO would be ₹5-6
lakhs per annum, which may even be insufficient to meet the operational expenses like salaries of one manager
and two support staffs, rent, office expenses, etc.
16 | P age

Figure 4: Proposed FPO Ecosystem Framework
17 | P age

Proposed FPO Ecosystem Framework
The proposed framework can be broadly categorized into two parts: first, support system
which provides support in various forms to the FPO; and second, operational structure which
describes the activities of the FPO.
Currently the producer organizations are getting support from multiple institutions. For
instance, SFAC is promoting and supporting producer organizations registered under the
Companies Act. NABARD supports all forms of producer organizations, NCDC and NAFED
are supporting cooperative forms of producer organizations. Under the proposed structure, a
National Board for FPO (NBFPO) would act as the apex organization for promotion and
development of all forms of producer organizations in the country. There are several
commodity specific boards existing in the country which are involved in development activities
pertaining to the respective commodity. The National Board for FPO would also work in
similar fashion. Various government institutions would work along with the national board so
that there won’t be any sector-wise/geographical area wise overlapping or skewed
development of FPOs. All the producer organizations may be part of a state level federation.
The FPOs need four types of support which will drive growth and sustenance: Managerial
competence, financial support, technology and capacity building. The financial support to the
FPOs may be channelized through state level federation from various institutions. These
government institutions along with CBBO, POPI and/or nearby KVKs would provide capacity
building to the FPOs. The FPO federation may play active role in marketing promotion of the
FPOs’ products at national and international level.
In the current digital era, technology helps in improving operational efficiency and proper
monitoring of the business activities. Data collection through technology can help the policy
maker in taking appropriate decision. Hence, technological support to the FPOs in the form of
ERP (Enterprise Resource Planning) can help achieve the above-mentioned goals. Investment
can be made by the Board and channelized through state FPO federation to all FPOs.
For managerial competence, the FPOs should recruit agribusiness professional. The CEO
having graduation in agriculture or allied sciences with management experiences will bring
professionalism in the FPO. They may be incentivized for the positive growth of the FPO by
having performance-linked compensation. The financial requirement of the FPO, both for
capital investment and working capital need may be met by financial institutions with the
credit guarantee of the federation/ supporting agencies.
The FPO would provide both backward and forward linkage to the farmers. Backward linkage
would be in the form of input sale, provision of farm machinery, capacity building and
advisory services to the farmers. FPO would acquire licence for input dealership and can
procure from the manufacturers directly or their distributors. The CEO’s expertise will bring
professionalism in entire operation right from negotiation with the supplier, procurement
quantity & frequency, inventory management and so on. FPO would provide a platform for the
agri-insurance companies to connect with the farmers for crop & livestock insurance. In
forward linkage, the FPO would explore value addition possibilities, while Government may
recognize the FPO as collection centre as well as procurement centre for the designated
commodities under different schemes.
18 | P age

REFERENCES:
Abhishek, S. (2021). The Balancing Act: Mitti, Members and Markets. In C. Shambu Prasad & D.
Deborah (Ed.), Fields of Change: Managerial Insights on FPOs in India (pp. 78-81).
Abrar, P. (2022). Flipkart, FPOs tie up to facilitate market access for farming communities.
Retrieved 5 January 2022, from https://www.business-standard.com/
article/companies/flipkart-fpos-tie-up-to-facilitate-market-access-for-farming-communities-
121102500944_1.html
Alagh, Y. K. (2019). Companies of Farmers. In Transition Strategies for Sustainable Community
Systems (pp. 289-293). Springer, Cham.
Annamalai, S. (2021). For farmers, by farmers. Retrieved 20 December 2021, from
https://www.thehindu.com/business/agri-business/for-farmers-by-
farmers/article7695088.ece
Anonymous. (2020). A comprehensive study for identification of vibrant FPO clusters for
effective market integration. TATA Trusts. Retrieved 5 January 2022, from
https://www.tatatrusts.org/upload/pdf/fpo-market-linkages-study-report.pdf
Anonymous. (2021. July 18). A marginal farmer scripts his success story. The Tribune. Retrieved
from https://www.tribuneindia.com/news/amritsar/a-marginal-farmer-scripts-his-
success-story-284889
Astad, P., & Sachin, Oza. (2021). Creating and Evaluating Portfolio of Products in Multi-
Commodity FPOs. In C. Shambu Prasad & D. Deborah (Ed.), Fields of Change: Managerial
Insights on FPOs in India (pp. 33-36).
Bizikova, L., Nkonya, E., Minah, M., Hanisch, M., Rama Mohana Rao, T., Speranza, C. I.,
Karthikeyan, M., Tang, L., Kate, G. K., Kelly, J., Celestin, A. C., &Timmers, B. (2020). A
scoping review of the contributions of farmer’s organizations to smallholder agriculture.
Nature Food, 1(10), 620–630. doi:10.1038/s43016-020-00164-x
Darshan, N.P., Rajashekar,B., Patil,K.V., Ravi, K.N.,&Parameshwar Naik, J. (2017). Farmer
Producing Organisations for Development of Farmers in India: An Economic
Perspective.International Journal of Current Microbiology and Applied Sciences,6(9), 1611-1615.
doi: https://doi.org/10.20546/ijcmas.2017.609.198
Das, R., &Mandal, S. (2021). Determinants of Smallholders' Participation in Farmer Producer
Companies-Insights from West Bengal, India. Decision, 48(3), 327-342.
Das, R.P. (Ed.). (2019). Assessment of Farmer Producer Companies (FPCs) in Karnataka.
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) GmbH, New Delhi. 1-56.
Retrieved from https://www.fpojunction.com/storage/app/public/booklet/
1Report_Assessment_FPC_Karnataka.pdf
Dave, V. (2017). NCDEX futures platform fetches good response in Gujarat. Retrieved 21
December 2021, from https://www.financialexpress.com/market/ commodities/ncdex-
futures-platform-fetches-good-response-in-gujarat/853975/
Deepthi, R., Sivaram, K., Pazhanivelan, & Sankar, D. (2021). Swimming against the tides: How a
women-led fishing collective became a profitable enterprise. In C. Shambu Prasad & D.
Deborah (Ed.), Fields of Change: Managerial Insights on FPOs in India (pp. 81-91).
Dey, K. (2018). Farmers Producer Companies in India: Determinants of performance and
viability. 53(35), 44-52.
19 | P age

Govil, R., Neti, A., & Rao, M. R. (2020). Farmer Producer Companies: Past, Present and Future.
Azim Premji University, Bangalore.
Khan, B. (2021). This Lady’s Organic Collective Helps Farmers Increase Their Income by 6 Times.
Retrieved 8 December 2021, from https://www.thebetterindia.com/262670/uttar-pradesh-
organic-farmers-company-earns-crores-biscuits-laddu-pickles/
Khan, B. (2021, August 27). With Rs 1 lakh and a dream to better the lives of farmers, he built a Rs
525 crore turnover agricultural company. Retrieved 8 December 2021, from
https://www.theweekendleader.com/Success/2992/the-rich-farmer.html
Krishisutra 2, (2013). Success stories of farmer producer organizations. Retrieved from
http://sfacindia.com/PDFs/Krishi-Sutra (Version2).pdf.
Majumdar, A. (2017). Bengal initiative to turn farmers into entrepreneurs a success. Retrieved 8
December 2021, from https://www.livemint.com/Politics/Hqj0crGhcRjkEu
y6D5VndO/Bengal-initiative-to-turn-farmers-into-entrepreneurs-a-succe.html
Manaswi, B. H, Kumar, P., Prakash, P., Kar, A., Anbukkani, P., Jha, G. K.,&Rao, D. U. M. (2019).
Impact of Farmer Producer Organisations on organic chilli (Capsicum frutescens) production
in Telangana. Indian Journal of Agricultural Sciences, Vol 89 (11): 98-102.
Mathew, J.C. (May 31, 2020). The New Farm Formula. Retrieved 5 January 2022, from
https://www.businesstoday.in/magazine/cover-story/story/the-new-farm-formula-
257977-2020-05-12
MCA. (n.d.). Reference Section 465(1) of the Companies Act, 2013. Ministry of Corporate Affairs,
Government of India. Retrieved from
https://www.mca.gov.in/content/dam/mca/pdf/Producer_Company.pdf
Nadiia, P. (2011).Producer Company as an Institutional Option for Small Farmers in India. (A Thesis
Submitted to LundsUniversitet in partial fulfillment of the requirementsfor the degree of
Master of Science).
Nalini, B., Turaga, R. M. R.,&Bhamoriya, V. (2015). Farmer Producer Organizations as Farmer
Collectives: A Case Study from India. Unpublished report, Indian Institute of Management,
Ahmedabad. Visited on 15 June 2016 at
http://www.iimahd.ernet.in/assets/snippets/workingpaperpdf/10539809132015-01-05.pdf
Nikam, V., Singh, P., Ashok, A., &Kumar, S. (2019). Farmer producer organisations: Innovative
institutions for upliftment of small farmers. Indian Journal of Agricultural Sciences, 89(9), 15-24.
NSO. (2021). Situation Assessment of Agricultural Households and Land and Livestock Holdings
of Households in Rural India, 2019. Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation.
Government of India.
Padmanand, V., Sushil, K.,& Kunal, S. (2018). Intrapreneurship and management for farmer
producer companies. Maharashtra Agricultural Competitiveness Project. Agri-Business
promotion facility-Grant Thornton India LLP.
Pallavi, G. L., Gayatri, L., Balakrishnan, S., &Parthsarathy, T. (2021). Fostering steady growth of
an FPO through a three-fold model of Technical, Financial and Market Linkage. In C.
Shambu Prasad & D. Deborah (Ed.), Fields of Change: Managerial Insights on FPOs in India (pp.
9-13).
Prasad, C. S. & Abhishek, S. (2021). Seeding an FPO Movement: Madhya Bharat Consortium’s
million farmer mission. In C. Shambu Prasad & D. Deborah (Ed.), Fields of Change: Managerial
Insights on FPOs in India (pp. 64-68).
20 | P age

Prasad, C. S. (2019). Farming as an Enterprise: Ten years of FPO Movement in India. State of
India’s Livelihood Report; Access Development Services: New Delhi, India, 37-48.
Raju, K V., Kumar, R., Vikraman, S., Moses Shyam, D., Srikanth, R., Kumara Charyulu, D., & Wani, S. P.
(2017). Farmer Producer Organization in Andhra Pradesh: A Scoping Study. RythuKosam Project.
Research Report IDC-16. Patancheru 502 324. Telangana, India: International Crops Research
Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics. 160 pp. ISBN 978-92-9066-592-2
Revathi, E., & Sultana, A. (2020). Farmers' Producer Companies in Telangana State. CESS Policy
Brief, 7, 1-4. Retrieved from https://cess.ac.in/wp-content/uploads/2020/04/Policy-Brief-
7-final-print-for-web-29-3-2020.pdf
RKVY. (n.d.). Farmer Producer Organization (FPO) – Horticulture. Rashtriya Krishi Vikash Yojana.
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare. Retrieved from
https://rkvy.nic.in/Uploads/SucessStory/KARNATAKA/2019/2019115958Farmer%20Pro
ducer%20Organization%20(FPO)%20-%20Horticulture.pdf
Saini, V (March 2, 2021). Rajasthan FPO & ITC MoU on Procurement of Organic Cumin.
Retrieved 5 January 2022, from https://krishijagran.com/crop-care/rajasthan-fpo-itc-mou-
on-procurement-of-organic-cumin/
Shah, T. (2016). Farmer Producer Companies: Fermenting New Wine for New Bottles. Economic &
Political Weekly, 51(8), 15-20.
Singh, S., & Singh, T. (2014). Producer Companies in India: Organization and Performance, New Delhi,
Allied Publishers, 152 pp., DOI: 10.1177/0049085715574215
Subash, S. P., Ojha, J., Ashok, A., &Nikam, V. (2019). Farmer Producer Companies in India:
Trends, Patterns, Performance and Way Forward. 10.13140/RG.2.2.32278.40000.
Sultana, Arifa. (2016). Successful Farmer Producer Companies in India - What Telangana State
can learn from them?
Swati, C. (2016). Luvkush Crop Producer Company: a farmer’s organization. Decision, 43(1), 93–
103. doi:10.1007/s40622-015-0121-1
Trebbin, A. (2014). Linking small farmers to modern retail through producer organizations-
Experiences with producer companies. Food Policy, 45, 35-44.
Trebbin, A.,& Hassler, M. (2012). Farmers’ producer companies in India: a new concept for
collective action? Environment and Planning A, 44(2), 411–427. doi:10.1068/a44143
Vandana, R., &Ayush, V. (2021). Conscious Consumption during Covid lockdown: How
communities in India’s Milk Capital created new markets for an FPO. In C. Shambu Prasad
& D. Deborah (Ed.), Fields of Change: Managerial Insights on FPOs in India (pp. 96-100).
Vutukuru, V.K., Singh, P.,& Kumar, M. (n.d.). Delivering Value for Small Farmers: Farmer
Producer Organizations in Jeevika. Jeevika Learning Note Series, 7, 69-76. Retrieved from
https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/298391515516507115/
122290272_20180012014525/additional/122548-WP-P090764-PUBLIC-India-BRLP-Booklet-
p.pdf
Zachariah, S. (2020). Hyderabad Techie Quits Job, Helps 400 Farmers Build Successful Organic
Food Brand. Retrieved 20 December 2021, from https://www.thebetterindia.com/
237841/andhra-pradesh-engineer-entrepreneur-farmer-earns-lakhs-yazali-farmers-
producer-company-rural-inspiring-ser106/
21 | P age

Appendix: Major Government Schemes for FPOs’ Promotion
▪ Business Development Assistance by NABARD: NABARD provides maximum ₹5 lakhs
financial assistance as grant to eligible FPOs on matching grant basis. In order to qualify for
the assistance, the FPO is required to have minimum 200 shareholders and 5 years business
plan along with other prerequisites. In case of more than ₹2,000 equity contribution, only
₹2,000 is being considered for arriving at the matching grant.
▪ Equity Grant Scheme of SFAC: Under the scheme, eligible FPCs (whose paid up capital is less
than ₹ 30 lakh can receive a grant equivalent to their equity contribution of their shareholder
members in the FPO subject to a maximum of ₹15.00 lakh in two tranches. This helps in
enhancing viability and sustainability of the nascent FPCs.
▪ Credit Guarantee Fund Scheme of SFAC: Under this scheme, SFAC provides credit
guarantee cover to eligible lending institutions (banks) to give collateral free credit to the
eligible FPOs up to ₹100 lakh. Maximum guarantee cover is limited to 85% of the amount.
▪ Exemption from Corporate Tax: From the FY 2018-19, the producer companies have been
exempted from corporate tax. Any Producer company making a turnover of up to ₹100 Crores
and earning profit out of the same, need not to pay any corporate tax, 100% tax deduction has
been allowed by proposing an extension to section 80P by inserting section 80PA to the Act.
The benefit shall be available for a period of five years.
▪ Central Sector Scheme on “Formation and Promotion of 10,000 New FPOs: Government of
India has launched this scheme in 2019 with initial financial and managerial support. The
scheme is targeted for five-year period till 2023-24, with adequate handholding support to the
FPOs for five years till 2027-28. It envisages to form and promote at least 15% of the targeted
10,000 FPOs in aspirational districts with at least one FPO in each block of these districts in the
country. For this, 9 Implementing Agencies (IAs) have been identified, These are Small
Farmers Agri-Business Consortium (SFAC), National Cooperative Development Corporation
(NCDC), National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD), National
Agricultural Cooperative Marketing Federation of India (NAFED), North Eastern Regional
Agricultural Marketing Corporation Limited (NERAMAC), Tamil Nadu-Small Farmers Agri-
Business Consortium (TN-SFAC), Small Farmers Agri-Business Consortium Haryana
(SFACH), Watershed Development Department (WDD)- Karnataka & Foundation for
Development of Rural Value Chains (FDRVC)- Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD). The
FPOs under the scheme can be formed either under Companies Act or under Co-operative
Societies Act. The IAs will engage specialized Cluster Based Business Organizations (CBBOs)
who have prior experience of farmer mobilization, marketing of agricultural products, MIS
(Management Information System) implementation and overall business development of
farmer organizations. Under this scheme, the FPOs get funding support for first 3 years.
Besides, it can avail Equity Guarantee of up to ₹15.0 lakhs and Credit Guarantee up to ₹2.0
crore of project loan per FPO through the IAs. Capacity building and skill development of
CEOs/Board of Directors, Accountant and other stakeholders are made through different
national/regional training institutions in India
22 | P age

Notes
23 | P age