National Digital Health Mission: Health Data Management Policy
Chapter I: Preliminary
1. Purpose
The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (“MoHFW”) is responsible for conceiving the idea of the
National Digital Health Mission (“NDHM”). This visionary project of the Government of India, stemming
from the National Health Policy, 2017 (“National Health Policy”) intends to digitise the entire healthcare
ecosystem of India. This would be done by creating digital health records, and creating and maintaining
registries for healthcare professionals and health facilities in order to ensure a smooth interoperable
framework for the multiple partners associated with healthcare delivery to individuals in India. The
National Digital Health Blueprint, 2019 (“Blueprint”) recommends that a federated architecture be
adopted, instead of a centralised architecture, for the management of digital health data to ensure
interoperability, technological flexibility and independence across the National Digital Health Ecosystem
(“NDHE”).
This Health Data Management Policy (“Policy”) is the first step in realising the NDHM’s guiding principle
of “Security and Privacy by Design” for the protection of individuals’/data principal’s personal digital
health data privacy. It acts as a guidance document across the NDHE and sets out the minimum standard
for data privacy protection that should be followed across the board in order to ensure compliance with
relevant and applicable laws, rules and regulations. This Policy will be dynamic in nature and may be
revised from time to time as may be required. Necessary guidelines may also be issued for the
implementation of the NDHM.
The NDHE is based on the principle of federated architecture, which allows interoperability between
independent and decentralized information systems, while enhancing the security and privacy of personal
data of individuals. Such interoperability shall be strictly compliant with the provisions relating to consent,
and protection of personal data as set out under this Policy. This would be essential to build a trust
quotient across the NDHE as well as to ensure that the personal data relating to the health of all
individuals in India is adequately protected.
In addition, participation of an individual in the NDHE will be on a voluntary basis and where an individual
chooses to participate, he/she will be issued a Health ID (as defined in this Policy) by the NDHM. Where
an individual wishes to avail of any health services, the Health ID of the individual may be verified by the
use of Aadhaar or any other method of identification as may be specified by the NDHM. The voluntary
use of Aadhaar in this Policy is envisaged as per the Aadhaar Authentication for Good Governance (Social
Welfare, Innovation, Knowledge) Rules, 2020. The failure or refusal to make use of Aadhaar would not
result in the denial of access to any health facility or service.
This Policy is to be read along with, and not in contradiction to, any applicable law, or any instrument
having the effect of any law together with the Blueprint, policies relating to information security,
guidelines relating to data retention and archival, or any other policies or guidelines which may be notified
from time to time for the implementation of the NDHM.
2. Applicability
The provisions of this Policy shall be applicable to the entities involved in the NDHM and the
partners/persons/processes who or which are a part of the NDHE. This includes:
(a) All entities and individuals who have been issued an ID under this Policy;
(b) healthcare professionals, including but not limited to doctors or healthcare practitioners (including
those practicing recognised Indian systems of medicine such as Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy,
Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy), nurses, laboratory technicians, and other healthcare workers;
(c) governing bodies of the MoHFW, the National Health Authority (“NHA”), relevant professional
bodies and regulators;
1

(d) Health Information Providers;
(e) any health facility which collects, stores and transmits personal data in electronic form in
connection with its transactions;
(f) payers such as Central Government, State Governments, insurers, health plans and charitable
institutions;
(g) pharmaceuticals – drug manufacturers, medical device manufacturers, and entities involved in the
relevant supply chain;
(h) research bodies such as institutions, individual researchers including researchers utilising data for
health data analytics, statisticians, analysts and public health institutions;
(i) all individuals, teams, entities or ecosystem partners who collect or process personal data of any
individual as part of the NDHE; and
(j) all methods of contact, including in person, written, via Internet, direct mail, telephone or
facsimile, as the case may be.
3. Objectives
The key objectives of this Policy are:
(a) to provide adequate guidance and to set out a framework for the secure processing of personal
and sensitive personal data of individuals who are a part of the NDHE in compliance with all
applicable laws;
(b) to safeguard digital personal data within the ambit of the NDHE, including the Personal Health
Identifier, the electronic health records and electronic medical records, by implementing adequate
technical and organisational measures across the NDHE;
(c) to create a system of digital health records which is easily accessible to individuals and health
service providers and is purely voluntary in nature, based on the consent of individuals, and in
compliance with international standards and/or other relevant standards related to data
interoperability and data sharing as may be notified for the implementation of NDHM from time
to time;
(d) to increase awareness of the importance of data privacy and instill a privacy-oriented mindset
among the members of NDHM and its ecosystem partners;
(e) to ensure portability in the provision of health services;
(f) to establish appropriate institutional mechanisms for auditing of the NDHE as needed and to
encourage stakeholders and ecosystem partners to adopt the data protection principles set out in
this Policy; and
(g) to leverage the information systems existing in the Indian health sector by encouraging conformity
with the defined data privacy standards and integrating such existing systems with NDHE.
4. Definitions
In this Policy, unless the context otherwise requires, -
(a) “anonymisation” in relation to personal data, means such irreversible process of transforming or
converting personal data to a form in which a data principal cannot be identified through any
means reasonably likely to be used to identify such data principal;
(b) “child” means a natural person/individual who has not completed eighteen years of age;
(c) “consent” means the consent referred to in Clause 9 of this Policy;
(d) “consent artifact” means a machine-readable document that specifies the parameters and scope
of data sharing and access that a data principal consents to in any personal data sharing
transaction;
2

(e) “consent manager” means an electronic system that interacts with the data principal and obtains
consent from him/her for any intended access to personal data;
(f) “data” means and includes a representation of information, facts, concepts, opinions, or
instructions in a manner suitable for communication, interpretation, or processing by humans or
by automated means;
(g) “data fiduciary” means any person, including the State, a company, any juristic entity or any
individual who alone, or in conjunction with others, determines the purpose and means of
processing of personal data. For the purpose of this Policy, data fiduciaries would include Health
Information Providers and Health Information Users if such entities are determining the purpose
and means of processing of personal data;
(h) “data principal” means the natural person/individual to whom the personal data relates;
(i) “data processor” means any person, including the State, a company, any juristic entity or any
individual, who processes personal data on behalf of a data fiduciary;
(j) “de-identification” means the process by which a data fiduciary or data processor may remove, or
mask identifiers from personal data, or replace them with such other fictitious name or code that
is unique to a data principal but does not, on its own, directly identify the data principal;
(k) “electronic health records” or “EHR” are one or more repositories, physically or virtually
integrated, of data in digital form, relevant to the wellness, health and healthcare of an individual,
capable of being stored and communicated securely and of being accessible by multiple authorized
users (such as healthcare professionals or health facilities), represented according to a
standardized or commonly agreed logical information model. Essentially, an EHR is a collection of
various medical records that get generated during any clinical encounter or events;
(l) “electronic medical records” or “EMR” refers to a repository of records that is stored and used by
the HIP generating such records to support patient diagnosis and treatment. EMR may be
considered as a special case of EHR, limited in scope to the medical domain or is focused on the
medical transaction;
(m) “harm” means, --
(i) bodily or mental injury;
(ii) loss, distortion or theft of identity;
(iii) financial loss or loss of property;
(iv) loss of reputation or humiliation;
(v) loss of employment;
(vi) any discriminatory treatment;
(vii) any subjection to blackmail or extortion;
(viii) any denial or withdrawal of a service, benefit or good resulting from an evaluative decision
about the data principal;
(ix) any restriction placed or suffered directly or indirectly on speech, movement or any other
action arising out of a fear of being observed or surveilled; or
(x) any observation or surveillance that is not reasonably expected by the data principal;
(n) “health facility” refers to health facilities across the country and includes hospitals, clinics,
diagnostic centres, health and wellness centres, mobile vans, ambulances and pharmacies;
(o) “Facility ID” refers to the unique ID allocated to each health facility in accordance with Chapter IV
of this Policy;
(p) “HFR” refers to the Health Facility Registry referred to in Clause 24 of this Policy;
3

(q) “Health ID” refers to the Identification Number or Identifier allocated to a data principal in
accordance with Chapter IV of this Policy;
(r) “Health ID Provider” means persons such as data fiduciaries, HIPs or HIUs which have been
authorised by the NDHM to issue Health IDs in accordance with Clause 17.1 of this Policy;
(s) “Health Information Provider” or “HIPs” means hospitals, diagnostic centres, public health
programs, or other such entities registered with the HFR or other entities which act as information
providers (by generating, storing and distributing health records) in the digital health ecosystem;
(t) “Health Information Users” or “HIUs” are entities that are permitted to request access to the
personal data of a data principal and can access the same with the consent of the data principal in
accordance with this Policy;
(u) “health locker” means a service of information exchange of electronic health records or electronic
medical records, which can be accessed by the data fiduciary or data processor upon receiving the
consent of the data principal and where such service can also be used by a data principal in order
to create Personal Health Records;
(v) “Healthcare Professional ID” refers to the unique ID allocated to each healthcare professional in
accordance with Chapter IV of this Policy;
(w) “nominee”, for the purposes of this Policy, refers to a natural person/individual who has attained
majority upon completing eighteen years of age and is authorized to take decisions with respect
to health data which otherwise a major data principal of sound mind could take;
(x) “official identifier” means any number, code, or other identifier assigned to a data principal under
a law made by Parliament or any State Legislature or which may be issued by the NDHM or any
other identifier specified by the NDHM, for the purpose of verifying the identity of a data principal;
(y) “personal data” means data about or relating to a natural person who is directly or indirectly
identifiable, having regard to any characteristic, trait, attribute or any other feature of the identity
of such natural person, whether online or offline, or any combination of such features with any
other information. For the purpose of this Policy, personal data would include Personal Health
Identifier;
(z) “Personal Health Identifier” or “PHI” is the data that could potentially identify a specific data
principal and can be used to distinguish such data principals from another. PHIs could also be used
for re-identifying previously de-identified data. It could include a data principal’s demographic and
location information, family and relationship information and contact details;
(aa) “Personal Health Records” or “PHR” is a health record that is initiated and maintained by an
individual. An ideal PHR would provide a complete and accurate summary of the health and
medical history of an individual by gathering data from many sources and making this accessible
online. Generally, such records are maintained in a secure and confidential environment such as
in a health locker, allowing only the individual, or people authorized by the individual, to access
the medical data;
(bb) “processing” in relation to personal data, means an operation or set of operations performed upon
personal data, and may include operations such as collection, recording, organisation, structuring,
storage, adaptation, alteration, anonymisation, retrieval, use, alignment or combination, indexing,
disclosure by transmission, dissemination or otherwise making available, restriction, erasure or
destruction;
(cc) “pseudonymisation” means a data management and de-identification procedure by which
personally identifiable information fields within a data record are replaced by one or more artificial
identifiers, or pseudonyms;
4

(dd) “repository” means a system where data is stored, maintained and preserved in a digital form and
is optimised for various uses and functions, as may be required;
(ee) "sensitive personal data" means means sensitive personal data as defined under Rule 3 of the
Information Technology (Reasonable Security Practices and Procedures and Sensitive Personal
Data or Information) Rules, 2011 and shall include official identifiers;
(ff) “significant harm” means harm that has an aggravated effect having regard to the nature of the
personal data being processed, the impact, continuity, persistence or irreversibility of the harm.
Chapter II: Entities under the NDHE, Applicable Law and Governance Structure
5. Entities under the NDHE and applicable laws
5.1 The NDHM shall specify the procedure for permitting different classes of entities such as data
fiduciaries, data processors, Health Information Providers, Health Information Users, repositories
and Health ID Providers to operate in the NDHE.
5.2 Such procedures shall provide, inter alia, for the eligibility criteria, authorization/ registration
process, obligations, and terms and conditions for the entities mentioned in Clause 5.1 above.
5.3 All entities to which this Policy is applicable must adhere to and comply with all applicable laws, and
rules and regulations made thereunder, and any other standards pertaining to data protection,
processing of personal or sensitive personal data, informational privacy, and information technology
that may currently be in force in India.
6. Governance structure
The governance structure for the NDHE shall be as specified by the NDHM. In addition, the governance
structure shall consist of such committees, authorities and officers at the national, state, health facility
and other levels as will be necessary to implement the NDHM. It shall consist of a data protection officer
(“NDHM-DPO”) who shall be a government officer and who shall, in addition to the functions identified
under this Policy, communicate with regulators and external stakeholders on matters concerning data
privacy and serve as an escalation point for decision-making on data governance and other matters
concerning data. In addition to the NDHM-DPO, the governance structure of the NDHE shall also consist
of a grievance redressal officer (“NDHM-GRO”) who shall be responsible for carrying out the functions
set out in Clause 32.3 of this Policy. It is further envisaged that the MoHFW and the Ministry of Electronics
and Information Technology (“MeitY”) shall provide overall guidance to the NDHM on relevant aspects of
the NDHE. Further specific details in relation to governance structure may be stipulated from time to
time.
Chapter III: Consent Framework
7. Collection of personal data by data fiduciaries
Data fiduciaries can collect personal data, which shall be limited to such data that is necessary for the
purposes specified under Clause 9.3 of this Policy.
8. General principles governing consent framework
The consent framework under this Policy should incorporate the following principles in relation to
processing of personal data by data fiduciaries:
(a) Data principals should at all times have control and decision-making power over the manner in
which personal data associated with them is collected and processed further.
5

(b) Specifically, in case of electronic consent, data fiduciaries should make use of appropriate
technological means to prevent security breaches and to guarantee integrity of access permissions
given by data principals. Such technological means must be in conformance with the national and
international standards, as may be notified for the implementation of NDHM from time to time.
(c) So far as sharing or disclosure of any personal data is concerned, the technical design of the
consent management framework should also ensure interoperability across all players of the
NDHE. The framework should be agnostic to applications, programming languages, and platforms.
9. Consent in relation to collection and processing of personal data
9.1 Data fiduciaries can collect or process personal data only with the consent of the data principal. It is the
responsibility of the data fiduciary to ensure that the consent given by the data principal is valid.
9.2 The consent of the data principal will be considered valid only if it is:
(a) free, having regard to whether it complies with the standards set out under Section 14 of the Indian
Contract Act, 1872;
(b) informed, having regard to whether the data principal has been provided with the necessary
information by way of notice, as set out in Clause 10 of this Policy, the scope of consent in respect
of the purpose of processing;
(c) specific, where the data principal can give consent for the processing of personal data for a particular
purpose;
(d) clearly given; and
(e) capable of being withdrawn at any time, having regard to whether the ease of such withdrawal is
comparable to the ease with which consent may be given.
9.3 The purposes for collection or processing of personal data shall be limited to those which may be specified
by the NDHM and such purposes will be related to the health of an individual or may be such other incidental
purposes which a data principal can reasonably expect, having regard to the purpose and the context and
circumstances in which the personal data was collected or processed.
9.4 In addition to the conditions mentioned in Clause 9.2 above, the consent of a data principal in respect of
collecting or processing any sensitive personal data will be obtained only after informing her/him the
purpose of, or operations in, processing which are likely to cause significant harm to the data principal.
10. Privacy Notice for the collection or processing of personal data
10.1 All data fiduciaries must give a clear and conspicuous privacy notice to data principals,
(a) prior to the collection of personal data from the data principal;
(b) at the time the data fiduciary changes its privacy policies or procedures; and
(c) prior to the collection or further processing of personal data of the data principal for any new or
previously unidentified purpose.
10.2 It is clarified that for the purpose of Clauses 10.1(b) and (c) above, all data fiduciaries must obtain fresh
consent from the data principal in accordance with Chapter III of this Policy.
10.3 The privacy notice should contain the following information:
(a) the purposes for which the personal data is to be processed;
(b) the nature and categories of personal data being collected by data fiduciary;
(c) the methods or mechanisms by which the personal data is collected by the data fiduciaries;
(d) the identity and contact details of the data fiduciary collecting the personal data;
(e) the right of the data principal to withdraw her/his consent, and the procedure for such withdrawal;
(f) the individuals or entities along with their contact details, including other data fiduciaries or data
processors with whom personal data may be shared, if applicable;
(g) the period of time for which the personal data shall be retained, or where the period of retention
is not known, then the criteria for determining such period;
6

(h) the existence of and the procedure for the exercise of rights of the data principal as referred to in
Clause 14 of this Policy; and
(i) the contact details and the mechanism by which the data principals may contact the data fiduciary
in relation to complaints, inquiries, and clarifications regarding the policies, practices and
procedures employed in the collection, storage, transmission or any other aspect of processing of
personal data.
10.4 The privacy notice shall be clear, concise and easily comprehensible to a reasonable person and shall be
available in as many languages in which the services of the data fiduciary are intended to be provided.
11. Method of obtaining consent
11.1 The consent of the data principal, as referred to in Clauses 8 and 9 of this Policy, for collection, or further
processing of personal data, may be obtained electronically or physically on paper, either directly from
the data principal or through a consent manager, as the case may be. Where the consent is received
physically on paper, then such consent may be converted to electronic form by the consent manager or
the data fiduciary.
11.2 Where consent is obtained through a consent manager as set out above then such consent manager shall:
(a) not access, process or store, in any manner whatsoever, the personal data shared with any data
fiduciary pursuant to any consent obtained through such consent manager;
(b) maintain a record of all consent shared and revoked, as the case may be, and
(c) maintain a record of consent logs/consent transactions in a manner which enables the audit and
review of any use of such data
11.3 Where the data principal has revoked his/her consent, it shall be the duty of the consent manager to
notify the data fiduciary of such revocation, as applicable.
11.4 It is clarified that electronic consent is the digital equivalent of a physical letter of permission given by the
data principal which, when presented, allows the consent manager or the data fiduciary to collect the
personal data, or further process the personal data that has already been collected from the data principal
for a particular purpose, as the case may be.
11.5 So far as further processing of personal data pursuant to Clauses 11.1, 11.3 and 11.4 above is concerned,
the data principal provides consent for data access and sharing that takes place between the Health
Information Providers and Health Information Users. If such processing is done through electronic
consent, then a consent artifact is generated to initiate the sharing of personal data. The consent artifact
will then be shared between the data principal and the Health Information Provider or a Health
Information User, through a consent manager.
11.6 Subject to the provisions of applicable law and this Policy, guidelines and technical specifications may be
set out by the NDHM in relation to consent obtained by data fiduciaries for collection and further
processing of personal data of data principals.
12. Processing personal data pertaining to a child
12.1 Data fiduciaries should ensure that the processing of the personal data of a child takes place only in such
manner that is in the best interests of the child.
12.2 Data fiduciaries should obtain the consent of the parents or guardians of the child prior to processing the
personal data of the child.
12.3 A valid proof of relationship and proof of identity of the parent is required to be submitted to the data
fiduciary in order to verify the consent of the parent or guardian for processing the personal data of the
child as set out in Clause 12.2 above.
7

12.4 Where the data fiduciary is processing the personal data of a child, then they shall not process such
personal data in a manner that is likely to cause harm to the child.
13. Processing personal data of data principals who are seriously ill or mentally incapacitated, or in
response to a medical emergency involving a threat to the life or a severe threat to the health of the
data principal
13.1 At the time a data principal opts to participate in the NDHE framework, such data principal should name
a nominee.
13.2 The nominee referred to in Clause 13.1 above will be authorised to give valid consent on behalf of the
data principal in the event the data principal becomes seriously ill, or mentally incapacitated, or where
the data principal is facing a threat to life or a severe threat to health, and is unable to give valid consent.
13.3 In the event that the data principal has not named a nominee under Clause 13.1 above or nominee himself
is also not able to give consent for any reason, then any adult member of the family of the data principal
can give valid consent on behalf of the data principal.
13.4 Consent can be given by a member of the family of the data principal as set out in Clause 13.3 above only
where there is proof of relationship with the data principal.
14. Rights of data principals
14.1 Data principals can request the following from the data fiduciaries:
(a) Confirmation and access:
(i) The data principal can obtain from the data fiduciary the following information:
A. a confirmation as to whether it has processed any personal data of the data
principal;
B. the personal data that has been processed or a summary of the same;
C. summary of processing activities carried out on such personal data; and
D. any information provided under the notice issued in accordance with Clause 10 of
this Policy in relation to such processing.
(ii) The data fiduciary will provide the information under sub-clause (i) above in a clear and
concise manner that is comprehensible to a reasonable person.
(iii) The data principal shall also have the right to access in one place the identities of all the
data fiduciaries with whom her/his personal data has been shared by any data fiduciary
together with the categories of personal data that has been shared.
(b) Correction and erasure:
(i) The data principal can, having regard to the purposes for which her/his personal data is
processed, rectify any inaccurate or misleading personal data, complete any incomplete
personal data and update any out-of-date personal data.
(ii) The data principal can request that their personal data be erased in certain circumstances:
A. If the storage of the personal data violates any of the data protection principles or if
the personal data is no longer necessary for the purpose for which it was processed.
B. Data principals can also delete the uploaded personal data stored in their health
lockers.
8

C. If the storage of the personal data for a certain period of time is mandated by law, it
cannot be erased.
D. Personal data can be blocked and restricted, rather than erased, in such instances
where the law prohibits erasure as it would impair legitimate interests of the data
principal or health information provider, or if the data principal disputes that the
personal data is correct and it cannot be ascertained whether such data is correct or
incorrect
E. Where erasure is not possible without disproportionate effort due to the specific
type of storage, over-writing, anonymisation or other method(s) of removal of the
personal data from live systems can be used.
F. Erasure or destruction of any personal data will be handled with utmost care, in
accordance with applicable law, rules, regulations, standards, this Policy, policies
relating to information security, and guidelines relating to data retention and
archival, as may be notified from time to time. Where data processors are erasing or
destroying any personal data on behalf of the data fiduciary, such erasure or
destruction shall be in accordance with their contractual terms of service and a
notification of the erasure or destruction shall be required.
(c) Restrict or object to disclosure: Subject to applicable law, the data principal can restrict or object
to the disclosure of their personal data by the data fiduciary
(d) Data portability: As may be applicable, the data principal can request from the data fiduciary, a
copy of the following in a structured, commonly used and machine-readable format, to the extent
technically feasible or where compliance with such request would not reveal a trade secret:
(i) the personal data provided to the data fiduciary; or
(ii) the personal data which has been generated in the course of provision of services by the
data fiduciary.
The data principal can also request that the personal data specified above be transferred to
another data fiduciary.
14.2 General conditions for submitting requests
(a) All requests under Clause 14.1 above will be made by the data principal in writing, through e-mail
or any other electronic means to the designated officer of the data fiduciary either directly or
indirectly through a consent manager.
(b) The request will be made with the necessary information as regards to the identity of the data
principal and the data fiduciary will acknowledge the receipt of such request. All requests will be
addressed by the data fiduciary in a timely manner and in compliance with the applicable laws,
regulations and this Policy.
(c) In the event that any request for correction, completion, updation or erasure of any personal data
is accepted by the data fiduciary, such data fiduciary will take necessary steps to notify all relevant
entities or individuals to whom such personal data may have been disclosed regarding the relevant
correction, completion, updation or erasure, particularly where such action may have an impact
on the rights and interests of the data principal or on decisions made regarding them. The data
fiduciary will also notify the data principal once the relevant personal data has been corrected,
completed, updated or erased..
(d) In the event that any request for correction, updation, completion or erasure of personal data is
rejected, the data fiduciary will provide the data principal reasons in writing for such refusal. If the
data principal is not satisfied with such reasons, it may require that the data fiduciary take
9

reasonable steps to indicate, alongside the relevant personal data, that the same is disputed by
the data principal.
(e) In the event of the death of the data principal, the nominee of the data principal may have access
to the personal data of the data principal, only if such access by such person was specifically
consented to by the data principal.
(f) The data fiduciary will not impose any restrictions on the method and channel of raising requests
by data principals under Clause 14.1 above.
(g) The data fiduciary will maintain records of all requests received under Clause 14.1 above
irrespective of their fulfilling status.
Chapter IV: ID Policy
15. Allocation of Health ID
15.1 A data principal may request for the creation of a Health ID at no cost, which will be required to enable
them to participate in the NDHE. Any processing of personal data that may take place for creation of such
ID must be in accordance with this Policy.
15.2 A Health ID may be issued through such means as may be specified by the NDHM,
15.3 When so required for availing any health service, a Health ID may be verified by using a data principal’s
Aadhaar number or any other method of identification as may be specified by the NDHM.
15.4 The personal data of a data principal shall be linked to his/her Health ID, and any data principal in
possession of such a Health ID shall be deemed to be the owner of such personal data.
15.5 The consent given by a data principal shall be linked to his/her Health ID, and every such instance of
consent given by a data principal shall also be accessible by the data principal through his/her Health ID.
15.6 A data principal in possession of a Health ID shall be able to provide or revoke his/her consent in order to
enable or restrict any sharing of personal data linked with such ID, and shall be able to update his/her
personal data in accordance with this Policy.
15.7 In the instance that a data principal in possession of a Health ID is unable to access the personal data
linked with such ID due to any reason, such as being unable to provide details of such Health ID, the data
principal shall be able to recover such data by verifying their identity through such means as may be
specified by the NHDM.
15.8 The NDHM may enable the data principal to deactivate their Health ID and activate it when needed by
the data principal. Consent in relation to sharing of personal data linked with such Health ID shall be
deemed to have been revoked for the period of such deactivation. The procedure in relation to such
deactivation and activation shall be specified by the NDHM.
16. Principle of non-exclusion for Health ID
16.1 The participation of the data principal in the NDHE as set out under this Policy shall be on a voluntary
basis only.
16.2 Every data principal shall, at any point of time, have the choice of opting-out of the NDHE as per the
process that will be set out by the NDHM, and where such choice is proposed to be exercised, then such
data principal shall have the right to delete their Health ID, de-link their personal data across data
fiduciaries and require the removal of personal data linked with such ID subject to the relevant guidelines
10

relating to data retention and archival that may be notified from time to time, as well as any applicable
law.
16.3 The NDHM shall ensure that the means of verification that are specified under Clause 15.3 of this Policy
do not have the effect of preventing an individual not in possession of an Aadhaar number or a mobile
number from being issued a Health ID.
16.4 No individual shall be denied access to any health facility or service or any other right in any manner by
any government or private entity, merely by reason of not creating a Health ID or disclosing their Health
ID, or denying consent for processing of personal data which is not necessary for providing health services,
or for not being in possession of a Health ID, or for not choosing to participate in the NDHE.
16.5 Pursuant to Clause 12 of this Policy, it is clarified that the parent or guardian of a child may request for
the creation of a Health ID on behalf of such child in accordance with Chapter III of this Policy and
applicable law. Every child attaining the age of majority upon completing eighteen years of age, whose
personal data has been processed under Clause 12 of this Policy, will have the choice of opting out of the
NDHE in accordance with Clause 16.2 above.
17. Creation of Health ID
17.1 A Health ID Provider wishing to issue a Health ID can register with the NDHM and obtain an authorisation
key to access the services required for issuance of a Health ID.
17.2 A data principal may create his/her own Health ID themselves in accordance with the procedure set out
in Clause 17.3 below, or through the services of a Health ID Provider in accordance with the procedure
set out in Clause 17.4 below.
17.3 A data principal may create his/her Health ID by:
(a) accessing such web-based portal as may be specified by the NDHM;
(b) verifying his/her identity through Aadhaar or other means as may be specified by the NDHM;
(c) filling in the other details that are required on such portal; and
(d) enrolling for a Health ID.
17.4 A Health ID may be created for a data principal through the services of a Health ID Provider authorised by
the NDHM under Clause 17.1 above for the purpose of issuing such ID. Such Health ID Provider:
(a) shall verify whether a Health ID is linked to the Aadhaar number of such data principal, if provided
by the data principal;
(b) if no such ID exists, then the Health ID Provider shall register such data principal and create his/her
Health ID using Aadhaar or other means of verification as may be specified by the NDHM; and
(c) may provide an e-card or a physical card to the data principal to enable them access to the details
of their Health ID.
18. Allocation of a Healthcare Professional ID
18.1 The processing of personal data for the creation of a Healthcare Professional ID must be in accordance
with the data protection principles set out in this Policy.
18.2 A healthcare professional may request for the creation of a Healthcare Professional ID at no cost, which
will be required to enable them to participate in the NDHE as set out under this Policy.
18.3 A Healthcare Professional ID may be issued through such means as may be specified by the NDHM.
11

18.4 A Healthcare Professional ID shall be in electronic form, and a healthcare professional in possession of a
Healthcare Professional ID shall not be permitted to create a second ID. Such Healthcare Professional ID
shall be non-transferrable.
18.5 A Healthcare Professional ID may be used to view the electronic health records of a data principal, subject
to such consent being provided by the data principal and strictly in accordance with the terms of such
consent, as set out above in this Policy.
18.6 A healthcare professional may e-sign documents, such as e-prescriptions, diagnostic reports, discharge
summaries and e-claims using their Healthcare Professional ID.
18.7 A Healthcare Professional ID shall be used to verify a healthcare professional for services created by the
NDHM as part of the NDHE, including the purchase of liability insurance, tele-medicine and other
government services.
19. Principle of non-exclusion for Healthcare Professional ID
19.1. The participation of the healthcare professional in the NDHE as set out under this Policy shall be as per
the policy stipulated by the NDHM in this regard.
19.2. Every healthcare professional shall have the choice of opting-out of the NDHE, cancelling their Healthcare
Professional ID, and requiring the removal of any personal data linked with such ID in accordance with
any guidelines relating to data retention and archival that may be notified from time to time, as well as
any applicable law.
19.3. It is clarified that the right of a qualified healthcare professional to practice or work in India shall not, in
any way, be restricted or impeded merely by reason of not being in possession of a Healthcare
Professional ID or for not choosing to participate in the NDHE.
20. Creation of Healthcare Professional ID
20.1 A healthcare professional shall be required to verify their professional credentials, and any updates to
such credentials, through the respective council, board, department or regulatory or professional body
which governs their practice or through any other agency as may be notified by NDHM in order to create
a valid Healthcare Professional ID.
20.2 The NDHM shall specify the authorised registrars for the purpose of verification of professional
credentials as per Clause 20.1 above.
20.3 A healthcare professional may create their Healthcare Professional ID by:
(a) accessing the web portal as may be specified by the NDHM;
(b) verifying their identity through Aadhaar or other identity proof as may be specified by the NDHM; and
(c) filling in other details as may be required.
Upon verification of their professional credentials by the NDHM through the authorised registrars
under Clause 20.2 above, such healthcare professional may be issued a Healthcare Professional ID.
21. Allocation of Facility ID
21.1 A health facility in India may request for the creation of a Facility ID at no cost, which shall be required to
enable them to participate in the NDHE as set out under this Policy.
21.2 A Facility ID may be issued through such means as may be specified by the NDHM.
21.3 A Facility ID shall be in electronic form, and a health facility in possession of a Facility ID shall not be
permitted to create a second ID.
12

21.4 A health facility in possession of a Facility ID may share the personal data of a data principal with such
data principal and any healthcare professionals, subject to the consent of the data principal and in strict
accordance with the terms of such consent, in accordance with this Policy.
21.5 The Facility ID may be used to e-sign all documents, which are necessary to avail health services.
21.6 The possession of a Facility ID does not deem that the health facility is legal, or that it holds all permissions
and licenses as may be required by applicable laws.
22. Principle of non-exclusion for Facility ID
22.1 The participation of the health facility in the NDHE as set out under this Policy shall be as per the policy
stipulated by the NDHM in this regard.
22.2 Every health facility shall have the choice of opting-out of the NDHE, cancelling their Facility ID, and
requiring the removal of any personal data linked with such ID in accordance with any guidelines relating
to data retention and archival that may be notified from time to time, as well as any applicable law.
22.3 The right of a health facility to provide any services in India shall not, in any way, be restricted or impeded
merely by reason of not being in possession of a Facility ID or for not choosing to participate in the NDHE.
23. Creation of Facility ID
23.1 A health facility may register their facility for a Facility ID as per the registration procedure as may be
specified by the NDHM.
23.2 The owner or manager of a health facility may update details of such facility through the web portal as
may be specified by the NDHM.
23.3 The owner or manager of a health facility referred to in Clause 23.2 above is not deemed to be the true
legal owner or manager of such health facility.
23.4 Any updates made under Clause 23.2 above shall be verified by health facility auditors referred to in
Clause 24.2 of this Policy before confirmation in the HFR.
24. Health Facility Registry
24.1 A health facility possessing a Facility ID shall be included as part of the HFR.
24.2 THE HFR shall deploy health facility auditors to verify that the services offered by the health facility are
the same as claimed by such facility during the registration process, that such health facility is operational
at the time of its listing and is located at the address as claimed by such health facility.
24.3 The HFR shall verify that the person claiming to be the owner or manager of a health facility is capable of
updating and maintaining the details of the facility online, and of e-signing digital documents on behalf of
the health facility.
25. Safeguards for creation of Health ID, Healthcare Professional ID or Facility ID
25.1 The processing of any personal data for the purpose of creating a Health ID, Healthcare Professional ID or
a Facility ID shall be in accordance with applicable law and the principles set out under this Policy.
25.2 The creation of a Health ID, Healthcare Professional ID or Facility ID shall collect only such data as may be
essential to identify and verify a data principal, healthcare professional or health facility, as the case may
be, and any personal data which is not essential for this purpose shall not be processed for the purpose
of creating such ID.
13

Chapter V: Obligations of data fiduciaries in relation to processing of personal data
26. Privacy principles to be followed by data fiduciaries
Subject always to the provisions of applicable laws, data fiduciaries will follow the following principles
while processing any personal data under this Policy:
26.1 Accountability
They will be accountable for complying with measures which give effect to the privacy principles while
processing any personal data by it or on its behalf. However, the true ownership and control of the
personal data will remain with data principals.
26.2 Transparency
They will take all necessary steps to maintain transparency in processing any personal data and will make
the following information available to the NDHM as may be required:
(a) the categories of personal data generally collected and the manner of such collection;
(b) the purposes for which the personal data is generally processed;
(c) any categories of personal data processed in exceptional situations or any exceptional purposes of
processing that create a risk of significant harm;
(d) the existence of and the procedure for exercise of rights of data principal and any related contact
details for the same;
(e) the grievance redressal procedure; and
(f) where applicable, any rating in the form of a data trust score that may be accorded to the data
fiduciary.
In addition to the information specified above, the data fiduciary will also notify the data principal, from
time to time, the important operations in the processing of any personal data related to the data principal.
The information provided by the data fiduciary will be in an intelligible form, using clear and plain
language
26.3 Privacy by Design
They shall consider data protection requirements as part of the design and implementation of their systems,
services, products and business practices. The federated design of the NDHE ensures that no personal data other
than what is required at a minimum to create and maintain Health IDs, Facility IDs or Health Professional IDs
shall be stored centrally. Electronic medical records shall be stored at the health facility where such records are
created, or at such other entities as may be specified under Clause 5 of this Policy. Electronic health records shall
be maintained by entities specified under Clause 5 of this Policy, as a collection of links to the related medical
records. The NDHM shall issue appropriate technological and operational guidelines providing for the
establishment and maintenance of the federated architecture, for ensuring the security and privacy of the
personal data of data principals, and for maintenance of electronic medical records and electronic health
records.
They will prepare a privacy policy containing the following information:
(a) clear and easily accessible statements of its practices and policies;
(b) type of personal or sensitive personal data collected;
(c) the purpose of collection and usage of such personal or sensitive personal data;
(d) whether personal or sensitive personal data is being shared with other data fiduciaries or data
processors;
(e) reasonable security practices and procedures used by the data fiduciary to safeguard the personal
or sensitive personal data that is being processed.
14

The privacy policy referred to above shall be published on the website of the data fiduciary. In addition,
the data fiduciary shall also make available a privacy by design policy on its website containing the
following information:
(a) the managerial, organisational, business practices and technical systems designed to anticipate,
identify and avoid harm to the data principal;
(b) the obligations of data fiduciaries;
(c) the technology used in the processing of personal data, in accordance with commercially accepted
or certified standards;
(d) the protection of privacy throughout processing from the point of collection to deletion of personal
data;
(e) the processing of personal data in a transparent manner; and
(f) the fact that the interest of the data principal is accounted for at every stage of processing of
personal data.
The privacy policy issued and the principles of privacy by design followed by the data fiduciaries should
be in consonance with this Policy and applicable law.
26.4 Choice and Consent Driven Sharing
They will give data principals a choice to opt-in/opt out of the NDHE and take their consent in accordance
with Clause 9 of this Policy prior to accessing, sharing or processing any of their personal data. This
consent will be free, informed, clear and specific in respect of the purpose identified in the privacy notice
issued under Clause 10 of this Policy.
26.5 Purpose Limitation
All personal data collected and processed by the data fiduciaries should be for a specific, lawful and clear
purpose identified in the privacy notice issued under Clause 10 of this Policy and consented by the data
principal.
26.6 Collection, Use and Storage Limitation
They will collect the personal data from the data principals as is necessary for the purposes of processing
and will use the personal data for the purpose for which it was collected. The processing of all personal
data will be in a fair and reasonable manner, ensuring the privacy of the data principal. No personal data
shall be transferred by the data fiduciary unless such transfer is in accordance with this Policy, subject
always to the provisions of applicable laws. The personal data collected will not be retained beyond the
period necessary to satisfy the purpose for which it is collected and the data fiduciary will delete such
personal data at the end of such processing in accordance with Clause 14 of this Policy as well as any
guidelines relating to data retention and archival that may be notified from time to time. Personal data
may be retained for a longer period of time if specifically consented to by the data principal or if such
retention is necessary to comply with any obligation under any applicable law. The data fiduciary will
undertake a periodic review to determine whether it is necessary to retain the personal data in its
possession.
26.7 Empowerment of Data Principal
The data fiduciary should believe in strengthening the rights of data principals in relation to their personal
data. Data principals will enjoy rights as specified in Clause 14.1 of this Policy.
26.8 Data Quality
They shall take necessary steps so that the personal data which is processed is updated, complete,
accurate, and not misleading, having regard to the purpose for which it is processed. All personal data
15

should be reliable and verifiable. However, the data fiduciary will not be responsible for the authenticity
of the personal data supplied to them by the data principal.
Personal data once created cannot be erased or amended without following the due process referred to
in Clause 14.2 of this Policy. All personal data must also be traceable to its creator unambiguously.
26.9 Reasonable Security Practices and Procedures
They shall secure all personal data that they have processed by reasonable security practices and
procedures as specified under Clause 27.1 of this Policy.
27. Transparency and accountability measures
27.1 Reasonable Security Practices and Procedures
(a) The data fiduciaries will implement such security practices and standards and have a
comprehensive documented information security programme and information security policy that
contain managerial, technical, operational and physical security control measures that are
commensurate with the data/information assets being protected by them.
(b) In the event of a data/information security breach, the data fiduciary shall be required to
demonstrate, as and when called upon to do so by any agency mandated under the law, that they
have implemented security control measures as per their documented information security
programme and information security policies.
(c) The data fiduciaries will, having regard to the nature, scope and purpose of processing personal
data, the risks associated with such processing, and the likelihood and severity of harm that may
result from such processing, implement necessary security safeguards including the use of de-
identification and encryption methods, methods to protect the integrity of the personal data
collected, and methods to prevent misuse, unauthorised access to, modification, disclosure or
destruction of personal data. Every data fiduciary shall undertake a review of its security
safeguards in a periodic manner and take appropriate measures accordingly.
(d) The data fiduciaries will implement the International Standard IS/ISO/IEC 27001 on "Information
Technology - Security Techniques - Information Security Management System - Requirements" as
well as any other standard as may be applicable to them.
(e) Subject always to the provisions of applicable laws, the standard(s) in relation to security practices
and procedures mentioned above may be certified or audited on a regular basis through an
independent auditor, duly approved by the Central Government. This audit shall be carried out by
an auditor at least once a year or as and when the data fiduciary undertakes a significant
upgradation of its processes, computer resources or systems.
(f) In the case of any entities who are implementing/involved in the NDHM and acting as a data
fiduciary in this regard, the chief information security officer (“NDHM-CISO”) and the NDHM-DPO
will undertake a periodic review of the security safeguards and take appropriate measures to
update such safeguards, if required.
27.2 Data management by data processors
(a) The data fiduciary may conduct appropriate due diligence covering data privacy and security prior
to engaging with any data processor.
(b) The data fiduciary may not engage, appoint, use or involve a data processor to process personal
data on its behalf without a contract entered into by the data fiduciary and such data processor.
16

(c) The data fiduciary will require its data processors to execute confidentiality agreements and non-
disclosure agreements covering data protection and privacy responsibilities. Such agreements will
be reviewed, updated and renewed on a periodic basis. The data fiduciary may require that the
confidentiality requirements under such agreements continue for a specified period of time even
after the contractual period ends.
(d) Subject to applicable law, the agreements referred to in clause (c) shall be in consonance with this
Policy. These agreements shall ensure that data processors adhere to the same level of data
protection that is adhered to by the data fiduciary.
(e) The data fiduciary will require its data processors to limit their access only to the personal data
necessary for the fulfilment of their employment/contractual duties based on “need-to-know”
principle, as the case may be.
(f) The data processor, and any employee of the data fiduciary or the data processor, will only process
personal data in accordance with the instructions of the data fiduciary and treat it confidential.
(g) The data processor may not engage, appoint, use, or involve another data processor in the
processing on its behalf, except with the authorisation of the data fiduciary and unless permitted
in the contract referred to in clause (b) above.
(h) The data fiduciary will ensure that training and awareness materials around data protection and
privacy are developed for its employees and data processors. Role-based training for individuals
or teams considering the nature of processing and their role shall be developed. Data privacy
training and awareness programs shall be conducted on a periodic basis (at a minimum, on an
annual basis) for all employees and data processors. Attendance records for such training shall be
maintained for documentation and audit purpose.
27.3 Data Protection Impact Assessment
(a) The data fiduciary will carry out a data protection impact assessment before it undertakes any
processing involving new technologies or any other processing which carries a risk of significant
harm to data principals.
(b) A data protection impact assessment shall contain, inter alia, a detailed description of the
proposed processing operation, the purpose of processing, nature of personal data being
processed, assessment of the potential harm and measures for managing, minimising, mitigating
or removing such risk of harm.
27.4 Maintenance of Records
(a) The data fiduciaries will maintain accurate and up-to-date records to document the important
operations in the data lifecycle including collection, transfers, and erasure of personal data. These
will cover the following:
(i) details of the ecosystem partners;
(ii) purposes of the processing;
(iii) description of the categories of data principals;
(iv) description of the categories of personal and sensitive personal data; and
(v) categories of recipients to whom the personal data is disclosed/transferred including to
data processors.
(b) In addition to the records referred to above and elsewhere in this Policy, the data fiduciaries will
also maintain accurate and up-to-date records of the periodic review of security safeguards
conducted under Clause 27.1 above, data protection impact assessments conducted under Clause
27.3 above and requests received under Clause 14 of this Policy.
17

27.5 Audit
(a) The data fiduciaries should maintain a strict audit trail of all processing activities which have access
to any personal data, at all times. A record of how such personal data is processed by the data
fiduciary should also be maintained in a manner that enables the audit and review of any use of
such personal data..
(b) Data fiduciaries should ensure that periodic audits of its data processors are conducted by third
parties in accordance with relevant standards and certifications, as may be specified by the NDHM,
to verify that such data processors process all personal data appropriately in compliance with the
privacy notices, contracts/confidentiality agreements, this Policy and any policy relating to
information security as may be notified from time to time.
.
(c) If the data fiduciary decides to update any personal data in accordance with Clause 14.2 of this
Policy, then the original personal data and an audit trail of the change shall be made available to
the data principal. However, the updated personal data with a new version number shall be
considered active.
Chapter VI: Sharing of personal data and obligations of entities with whom personal data is shared
28. Sharing of personal data by data fiduciaries
28.1 Any personal data processed by a data fiduciary may be shared with an HIU in response to a request made
by such HIU for personal data pertaining to the data principal, only where consent of the data principal is
obtained in accordance with Chapter III of this Policy.
28.2 Where an HIU makes a request for accessing any personal data under Clause 28.1 above, the data
fiduciary shall verify the consent shared with it, including whether such consent has been revoked by the
data principal, and where the consent is valid, it shall share such data with the HIU strictly in accordance
with Chapter III of this Policy.
28.3 A data fiduciary shall maintain a record of all consent obtained under this Policy, pursuant to which
personal data has been shared by such fiduciary under this Policy in a manner that enables the audit and
review of such data sharing.
28.4 Where the data principal has provided his/her consent for the sharing of their personal data under this
Policy, it shall not be used, disclosed or shared by the data fiduciary or any HIU in any other manner or
for any other purpose, except as provided in Chapter III of this Policy.
29. Sharing of de-identified or anonymised data by data fiduciaries
29.1 Data fiduciaries may make anonymised or de-identified data in an aggregated form available as per the
procedure set out in Clause 29.5 below for the purpose of facilitating health and clinical research,
academic research, archiving, statistical analysis, policy formulation, the development and promotion of
diagnostic solutions and such other purposes as may be specified by the NDHM.
29.2 The NDHM shall set out a procedure through which any entity seeking access to anonymised or de-
identified data under this Policy will be required to provide relevant information such as its name, purpose
of use and nodal person of contact and, subject to approval being granted under this procedure, the
anonymised or de-identified data under this Policy shall be made available to such entity on such terms
as may be stipulated in this behalf.
29.3 Any entity which is provided access to de-identified or anonymised data shall not, knowingly or
unknowingly, take any action which has the effect of re-identifying any data principal or of such data no
longer remaining anonymised.
18

29.4 The data fiduciary which is undertaking to anonymise or de-identify data under this Policy shall be
responsible for ensuring compliance with the procedure for such anonymisation or de-identification as
set out by the NDHM in Clause 29.5 and any non-compliance will be dealt with as per Clause 35.
29.5 The de-identification or anonymisation of data by a data fiduciary shall be done in accordance with
technical processes and anonymisation protocols which may be specified by the NDHM in consultation
with the MeitY.
29.6 The technical processes and anonymisation protocols referred to in Clause 29.5 above shall be periodically
reviewed by the NDHM and such review shall have regard to the nature and sensitivity of the data being
processed, the risks of re-identification of data principals and the robustness of the anonymisation
protocols.
30. Obligations of HIUs upon sharing of personal data
30.1 In addition to the obligations set out in Chapter V, an HIU shall ensure that any personal data under this
Policy:
(a) shall not be used by the HIU for any purpose other than what was specified to the data principal
at the time of obtaining his/her consent under Chapter III of this Policy;
(b) shall not be disclosed further without obtaining the consent of the data principal for such
disclosure in the manner as specified in Chapter III of this Policy; and
(c) shall be provided the same level of data protection as a data fiduciary under this Policy and only
be processed in accordance with this Policy, specifically provisions under Chapter V of this Policy
(d) shall not be retained beyond the period necessary for the purpose specified while obtaining
consent under Chapter III of this Policy.
30.2 An HIU shall follow the principle of data minimisation and shall obtain the consent of the data principal
only for such personal data that is necessary for the purposes for which such consent is being sought.
30.3 An HIU shall take all reasonable steps, including providing the data principal with a copy of the personal
data received by such HIU from a data fiduciary to ensure that the data principal can exercise the rights
as mentioned in Clause 14 of this Policy.
30.4 An HIU shall maintain:
(a) a record of all personal data that is disclosed to any other entity, including the names of such
entities, the time at which such personal data was disclosed and the categories of personal data
which was disclosed; and
(b) to the extent reasonable, a record of how such personal data is used by the HIU in a manner which
enables the audit and review of any use of such personal data.
30.5 Any entity with whom an HIU has shared personal data, after obtaining the consent of the data principal
under Clause 30.1 above, shall be subject to the same obligations as the HIU under this Policy and shall
only process such personal data in strict accordance with the terms of the consent which authorises such
sharing of personal data.
31. Restrictions on sharing, circulating or publishing of personal data
31.1 Any personal data of the data principal shall not be published, displayed or posted publicly by any person
or entity.
31.2 A database or record of any data which has been processed under this Policy shall not be made public,
unless such database or record is in an anonymised/de-identified and aggregated form and is processed
in accordance with the terms specified in Clauses 29.2 and 29.5 of this Policy.
Chapter VII: Grievance Redressal and Compliance
19

32. Grievance redressal
32.1 Data principals with inquiries and questions about the processing of their personal data may approach a
designated officer of the data fiduciary (referred to as Data Protection Officer) in writing, through email
or any other electronic means, as may be specified. The details of the Data Protection Officer shall be
provided on the website of the data fiduciary along with the format and process for filing the
inquiries/questions. It is clarified that where feasible, the data fiduciary may designate the Data
Protection Officer as the Grievance Officer mentioned in Clause 32.2 below.
32.2 A complaint can be made by the data principal regarding any contravention of this Policy which has caused
or is likely to cause harm to such data principal. The data fiduciary shall have in place the procedure and
effective mechanisms to redress the grievances of data principals efficiently and in a speedy manner. For
this, the data fiduciary shall designate a Grievance Officer and publish his name and contact details on its
website. The Grievance Officer shall redress the grievances of the data principal expeditiously but within
one month from the date of receipt of grievance.
32.3 In the event that a complaint is not resolved by the Grievance Officer of the data fiduciary as referred to
under Clause 32.2 above, the matter may be referred to the NDHM-GRO in writing or through an email
ID or any other electronic means provided under the grievance portal of NDHM website. The details of
the NDHM-GRO shall be displayed on the website along with the procedure for contact and the format
and processes for filing the above.
32.4 Separately, in addition to the above, NDHM shall maintain procedures for addressing and responding to all
inquiries from data principals about the processing of personal data. NDHM shall adequately publicise the
existence of these procedures.
33. Personal Data Breach and Incident Management
33.1 The data fiduciary shall formulate and implement a personal data breach management procedure, which
will be publicly displayed. The data fiduciary will also ensure that any instance of non-compliance with
the provisions of this Policy, or any instance of unauthorised or accidental disclosure, acquisition, sharing,
use, alteration, destruction of or loss of access to personal data that compromises the confidentiality,
integrity or availability of personal data to a data principal is promptly notified to relevant entities as may
be required by applicable law, including the Information Technology (The Indian Computer Emergency
Response Team and Manner of Performing Functions and Duties) Rules, 2013.
33.2 The data fiduciary shall also notify any incidents referred to in Clause 33.1 and the actions taken
pursuant to such incidents, to the NDHM in a timely manner.
33.3 Without prejudice to the foregoing, in the event of any incident of personal data breach, the person
responsible for such breach shall be liable in accordance with the provisions of applicable law.
34. Compliance and Policy Governance
34.1 The NDHM-DPO shall ensure adherence to this Policy and shall be responsible for compliance with all
applicable laws in force in India.
34.2 All individuals and entities who are covered by this Policy must comply with its requirements, and where
requested demonstrate such compliance.
34.3 This Policy may be revised from time to time. A copy of this policy together with any significant revisions
shall be made publicly available on the NDHM website.
35. Non-compliance with this Policy
35.1 Where any person to whom this Policy is applicable is found to be in violation of any of its provisions, such
person may not be permitted to participate in the NDHE. Additionally, any Facility ID or Healthcare
20

Professional ID issued to any person under Chapter IV of this Policy, may be suspended or cancelled. The
detailed procedures involved in relation to any suspension or cancellation as mentioned above shall be
set out by the NDHM.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Clause, “person” includes any data fiduciary, data processor, entity
responsible for managing consent managers, Health Information Provider, Health Information User,
health facility and healthcare professional.”
35.2 It is clarified that the above actions under this Clause shall be without prejudice to any other action that
can be initiated under the provision of applicable laws.
21