2

Sav.

‘of Health & Fam
rament of Ind

+ Ministry

Isation -.

7, an National AIDS Control Organ

rot

ily Well

,

'

ia:

a

nes

Gove

ESTABLISHMENTS

Indid'a reepoate D HV & Bexbally Jranmrmitiad Intecuang.
Minisary at Hearth § Pumnity Weitere, Goverimand of ene

.





» > Ministry of Health & Family Welfare ~ hae
_-_ Mieyst eae a Forty tare Sovarommttiode 7° S sof ygeae 0) 2 Governmentofindia ©) o. 2.

ce vforeg W. Z.Ta. (FA) 04/0007/2003-05 REGD. NO. D. L. (N) 04/0007/2003-05 wo es

rr enn area

Che Gazette of Jndia

SoH. -ST.We.-A1.-19052022-235873
CG-DL-W-19052022-235873

wiftrere S verre
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY

arcana

WEEKLY
a. 19) we fect, WE 8— BE 14,2022, aftary aera 18—Aure 24, 1944
No. 19] NEW DELHI, MAY 8—MAY 14,2022, SATURDAY/ VAISAKHA 18-VAISAKHA 24,1944

Se art F fet Tos Hear St ord & fra fi ae Pars SH H WTF LET UT ay

Separate Paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation

AIT I— avs 3—IBT- vs (Il)
PART I!— Section 3—Sub-section (ii)




National AIDS Control Organisation
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
Government of India

Alok Saxena
Additional Secretary &
Director General

Foreword

India is committed to achieve Sustainable Development Goal 3.3 of ending AIDS epidemic as a public health threat
by 2030. The current National AIDS and STD Control Programme (NACP) Phase-V will take the national response
towards attainment of this goal. One of the objectives of the NACP-V is less than 10% of people living with HIV and
key populations experience stigma and discrimination.

The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare remains unwavering in its commitment to secure health for all. The HIV
and AIDS (Prevention & Control) Act, 2017 came into force in September 2018. Itis the primary legislation protecting
and promoting the rights of people infected and affected with HIV. The Act takes a multi-sectoral approach and
prohibits discrimination in multiple settings.

HIV/AIDS is a major threat to the world of work. Healthy working condition is important for improving the lives of
people infected and affected by HIV/AIDS. From the evidences, it has been observed that the impact of HIV is mosily
on the productive segment of the labour force. | am happy to share that under Section 12 of the HIV and AIDS
(Prevention and Control) Act, 2017, the Central Government has notified the ‘HIV and AIDS Policy for Establishments
The fundamental purpose of this policy is to generate awareness on HIV and AIDS in establishments, prevent
transmission of HIV infection amongst workers, protect rights of those infected with and affected by HIV and AIDS,
ensure safe, non-stigmatised and non-discriminatory environment assuring equity and dignity at establishments
and standardise the obligation of every establishment in providing conducive working environment and
maintaining the confidentiality of HIV-related data of protected persons.

The employers and workers organisations, government ministries or departments at the National, State and district
levels, public or private sector companies, multi-national companies operating in India, and other social partners are
mandated to use this policy framework at their respective works. As guided by the policy, every establishment is
obligated to adopt the three guiding principles of non-discrimination, confidentiality relaied to HIV status and HIV-
related data and lastly to establish a grievance redressal mechanism by designating Complaints Officer.

It gives me immense pleasure to share with you the 'HIV & AIDS Policy for Establishments. | am confident that this
policy will play an important role in eliminating stigma and discrimination related to HIV and make way towards
attaining Sustainable Development Goal 3 of 'Good Health and Well Being"

(Alok Saxena)

Sth Floor, Chandralok Building, 36 Janpath, New Delhi-IIOOO! Tel. : 011-23325343
Fax: 011-23325335 E-mail: dir@naco.gov.in

aut wasngdl sara an, Preeay aan secara FY Wd Wels a Ua TG

Know you HIV status, go to the nearest Goverment Hospital for free Voluntary Counselling and Testing




J
Ne CO
wareg ae aRar weary Aarera
ARG WOR

National AIDS Control Organisation
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
Government of India

aera aad
Faer @rarar, ara.
Frese

Nidhi Kesarwanii, 1.A-s.
Director

Preface

The People Living with HIV and their families face discrimination due to either their known or perceived HIV
positive status. They are discriminated at the society, workplace, healthcare setting and educational
institutions. There are people who are HIV positive who have lost their jobs, forced to live in poverty, and their mental
health is immensely effected. These effects often result into person not adhering to the Anti-Retroviral treatment.

We are currently standing at Phase V of the National AIDS and STD Control Programme (NACP). One of the
major goals of the programme is to eliminate HIV/AIDS related stigma and discrimination by ensuring that less
than 10% PLHIV and key populations experience stigma and discrimination.

NACP Phase V prioritizes workplace, healthcare and educational as key setting to respond to the HIV/AIDS
related stigma and discrimination. The Government of India has formulated the HIV and AIDS Policy for
Establishments, 2022. This document is a guiding tool to help all employers and workers organisation, making their
organisations a better workplace for people who are affected by HIV. The policy outlines the roles of employers’
associations, employers and rights of employees to prevent, manage and mitigate HIV and AIDS impact.

| urge all establishments in the public as well as private sector to adopt this policy to provide a conducive,
healthy and productive working environment for people infected and affected by HIV and AIDS.

Wg

(Nidhi Kesarwani)

9th Floor, Chandralok Building, 36 Janpath, New Delhi-IIOOO! Tel. : 011-23325343
Fax : 011-23325335 E-mail: dir@naco.gov.in

aol wanda aera a, Freeda ura! seamed FY yO ele FT Ua WY

Know you HIV status, go to the nearest Goverment Hospital for free Voluntary Counselling and Testing




Dr. Anoop Kumar Puri
iIBBS, MD

Deputy Director General
Tel. +91-11-23731805

Fax : +91-11-23731746
Mob.: 9868143711

E.mail : anoopk.puri@nic.in

ral crea Pre
ea Vol Ud, weeile Sz, 36 2

Government of India
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
Nationa! AIDS Control Organlsation

6th Floor, Ghandralok Building,
36, Janpath, New Delhi - 110001

ddgcstnaco@gmail.com
ddgieenaco@gmail.com

HiV-related stigma and discrimination affects people in different walks of life, namely family, community,
workplace, education and healthcare Settings. India has been successful in addressing the AIDS epidemic and
from the inception, the National AIDS and STD Control Programme (NACP) has put the focus on communities and
placed their needs first, The NACPis committed to eliminate stigma and discrimination associated with HIV/AIDS,

The Government of India brought out one of the Most progressive legislative pieces of the country, in form of the
HIV and AIDS (Prevention and Control) Act, 2017. The Act provides the legal framework for the Government's
commitments that includes elimination of Stigma and discrimination against people affected by HIV. The ‘HIV and
AIDS Policy for Establishments' has been notified by the Central Government under the Section 12 of the HIV and
AIDS (Prevention and Control) Act, 2017.

The policy applies to all establishments as defined under the Act. The most inviolable feature of the ‘HIV and AIDS
Policy for Establishments’ is that it is applicable on all employers and workers organisations, government ministries

lam sure that this policy document will be helpful in ensuring safe, non-stigmatised and non-discriminatory working
environmentand maintaining the confidentiality of HIV-related data for protected Persons,

(Anoop Kumar Puri)




ae

‘ me rn i

Ves

i".

*,

WAUS OF CONTENTS

(NREMEES if)
CHAPTER I: Background and Indian Situation 12

ia Background

CHAPTERIV: Non-Discrimination Us | 5 1 6
a¥Non=discrimimation
(1) "Absence of discrimination at Employmentand Occupation

(2) EElealthcare and education settings
(3)EPublic utilities and resources
4)

(4) Holding public and private offices
®)

Rightto Movement

(7) ESegregation
(8) EEIlV,testing as pre-requisite for obtaining employmentis prohibited
©) Gigi d

: Confidentiality related to HIV statusa ddata
WxConfidentiality related toHlV,status)
Q.
ty,of data related to HIV,
APT I: Grievance Redressal Mechanism
@)
(2)
®)
(4)
(5)
7)
@)
9

TER Vil: Key Strategi d
ers: Employees etc 2124
WEKey Strategies)

(2a Role of Employer Associations/Chambers/Industries
Sam Role of E

(2)
Co
(3) [Designation of Complaints Offic
(4) Training of Complaints Officer
(5)
@)
Q

44 Role of Employees orco-workers

Sem Role of person infected with HIV,

(6a Role of Ministry of Health and Eamily,Welfare (National AIDS
Control Organisation) and State AIDS Control Societies

APPENDIXA’ 25


»
eee ~ ert ‘

edjImmuno-Deficiency;Syndrome)
Anitnetrovirentnerepy
Social[Responsibility)
Regalsenicestautnorty
AIDS]PreventionJand{ControlUnit}

»

~ ~~

Pd
L
~

>
Q
fe}
¢
‘on 9

>
ES

(2)
°
ben 3
se)
9
)
=
©

Tet Qe ery
2 aoe rr Cre
se aE DL hea
wee fey 2?
‘ oe ws Can
, er cr ee
“i, ea eee EIN
woe ey ee te —
te tre s)iaies
es rr wl Os
i . . tl ome, Pa
aoe . . ae
. 2 Ne pe a
ve . soe wee ee
. eee. Lee toe
-. + ee, eae
i ft SD algtew ee an .
ot oe a ade
. . ise
ne af we . ~
Pn : i ied
1 ee yy eae
+ rs er a?
Sle - ae eo :
vt “are a a ed :
a) nn 7" 2
as - 4 fifa eeres
w : at . -°
x. tet ee . . oor : . ey : tas te gel . wae oD =: fa
oot wou 2 ae phe i a ne - * . my ws
. 6 sok eee eT Naan ee tate ar 8 ” . tf: 3: .
yore 7 _ of a . veut ‘s 7e : .
, “ . wee ~ emerge oe we
se NN a Tet tT : ay :
N

A

a Management;Committee

immunodeficiencyVirus) 8
ntegrated,Counsellingfand}lesting|Centers) os

fandiCommunication “

egislative|ForumyonyAIDS}

(AIDS{Control{Organisation)

(AIDSJand/STD.Control[Programme,

PostiExposure]Prophylaxis

Peoplevivingywithtrilv)

Gate ADS Gane) Gacikehy

‘State{CouncilfonyAIDS}

‘Sustainable|DevelopmentiGoals)

iiransmitted|Infections)

i

STI


‘Background: Heath ‘is. ‘one. of. the priorities. for ‘assuring. perceptible economic: “and; social

.- development in today’ s fast-growing world. Health and economy. have been harids i in ‘gloves with
Fone another, countries who have aimed at ensuring universal access to health, ‘equity, and raising i
"ality, of care. have gicelied, ‘Strong and able workforce contributes’ to national: prosperity by” - 3

oy F “Ineréasing overall productivity and helping the ‘government and the pute t to thrive \ via positive an

ts . . Py ean Dy

‘economic outcomes., /

ws Hi and AIDS i is a ‘inreat to productive workforce. It has atfected many lives, where people face”
di iscrimination due to either their known or perceived HIV positive Status. They, lose their jobs, thus, «

: ‘ oe _ are forced to, live i in abject poverty with immediate ripple ‘effect on their close family | members and. = one on
Bans a yo - children ‘in terms of poor. expenditure on education and health. Thus, HIV affected person is ° Pay
‘ .compelled to face double jeopardy of f losing: income and livelihood’ on one. hand and facing « a

discrimination on the other.

People living with HIV are 2 greatly impacted by’ muttifarious discrimination (societal, workplace,
‘healthcare setting, educational institutions), loss of livelihood, inequality and infringement of rights.
Since HiVinfection is lifelong, People Living with HIV have to live with it forthe rest of the life. °

The Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (Prevention and
Control) Act, 2017 is a landmark legislation to provide a conducive environment to people infected
with and affected by HIV and AIDS. The Act aims to address stigma and discrimination so that
people infected with and affected by HIV and AIDS are not discriminated in household settings,
establishment settings and healthcare settings. Their right to insurance, movement, holding public
and private office, residence etc. should be maintained as per the prevailing laws and policies. The
Act also reinstates constitutional, statutory and human rights of people infected with and affected by
HIV and AIDS. It also provides for a robust grievance redressal mechanism in form of Complaints
Officer at establishments and Ombudsman at state level.

2. Situationin India: According to India HIV Estimates 2019 Report, there are an estimated 23.49 lakh
people living with HIV, with an adult (15 to 49 years) HIV prevalence of 0.22 per cent. It is estimated
that there were around 69,220 new HIV infections in the country during 2019, indicating a 37.4 per
cent decline in new HIV infections during 2010 to 2019. During the same period, HIV and AIDS
related deaths also declined by 66.1 percent.


Os

me 7 e Ss Ni ‘the HIV and AIDS: (Prevention and Control). Act, 2017.7 Thé manner ot ot notifying the Policy is laid .

2, “Aim: The Pélidy aims:

> Sy ran a 7 . on : ve _ a a ane Le Es i aa ro JOND. ;
1, a Rationale: - ey yas tla es ODEN EO Lene a as
) Section 12 of the HIV. afid Aibs (Prevention and Contra) Act; 2017 mandates the, Gentral ms
“Government to draft ' HIV ‘and AIDS Policy for Establishments’. Thus, the Policy emanates from. °

art

_dowintunderthe Central Government Rules. he ps DMN

so oo “ ,
Dose - ore, . ie on

(2): Under ‘sustainable development goal 3 of ‘Good Health and’ well Being! ‘target of 3.3 states, a

‘ related toHIVi is a Prerogative tc to achieve this is goal.

-(1) Generate awareness onHIV and AIDSi in eslablishments._
. (2) Prevent transmission of HIV infection amongst workers. .
. _ (8) Protect rights of those infected with and affected by HIV and AIDS. .
: (4) Ensure safe, non- stigmatised and non- n-discriminatory environment assuring equity and dignity at
establishments.
(5) Standardise the obligation of every establishment i in providing conducive working environment
- and maintaining the confidentiality of HIV-related data for protected persons.

%v

3. Scope: The Policy applies to all establishments, an establishment is a body corporate or co-

operative society or any organisation or institution or two or more persons jointly carrying out a
systematic activity for a period of twelve months or more at one or more places for consideration or
otherwise, for the production, supply or distribution of goods or services.

The employers’ and workers’ organisations, government ministries or departments at the national,
state and district levels, public or private sector companies, multi-national companies operating in
India, and other social partners are mandated to use this Policy framework in implementing the HIV
and AIDS Policy at their respective works.

The Policy is based on following facts about HIV and AIDS:

(1) The known routes of transmission of the Human Immunodeficiency Virus are through:

(a) aUnprotectedisexUalicontactiwithrallllViinfected]persong
(6) Sharing of, HiViinfected, needlesroysyringesy
(C)MEromiEVinfectedimother-to-childyduringipregnancyxchildbirthrobreastifeedingrand)

(dc) ATransfusion of HiVjinfected blood. onblood products}

3)

ne vat "ending the: epidemic of AIDS by. 2030.: Furthermore, elimination. of stigma a and discrimination F rn


“reg?

7 ,€ ej witht the advent of Anti- Retroviral Therapy, HV i is now. a chronic ‘manageable disease ike many : * cos!
: other’ niofi-communicable: diseases, including ‘diabetes, hypertérision: ‘and’ asthma. ‘Thére- is no. S o

Scientific’ or. pidemiological ‘evidence: to suggest that HIV. can be%transmittéd through ordinary: .
"Workplace contact, ‘talking. to or touichinig the ‘person, using the samé office equipment,. tools;.”
“utensils. or bathroom as ‘a person infected with HM). In ‘special situations where. there may ‘be. a” *
= potential risk of ‘exposure, for exarriple healthcare workers who may be exposed to blood « or blood ! ic = is:
--" products, there’ are specific: and appropriate. infection- control” measures’ “known as’ “Universal », Zz
“Precautions that ought to be followed. Transmission i is therefore not likely i in, ‘the regular Workplace’ 7 e :
geting. cm nae Toy . ° oy es “ ie y - A ‘ oO vos e aoe ‘ ‘

we o . on 4f .
4 we bee

6 4 i, the availabilty’ of Anti Retrovird ‘Thereby, the life. of people ing with HIV has 2s prlonged ae

CHAPTER

(Guiding)Principles\torEstablishments

The HIV and AIDS Policy for Establishments adopts three key principles mentioned in the HIV and AIDS
“ (Prevention and Control) Act, 2017. These principles are to be adopted by all establishments i inthe spirit in
whichtheyarementioned. =~

These principles include:

Non-discominationfagainst{peoplesnfectediwithyandjattected|byiEilVfandJAIDS:

Confidentiality;related,toone.s -HilVistatus’and HlV-related datas

(Grievancelredressal{mechanismynithelformroficomplaints\Officegatrestablisnmentsjand,
‘OmbudsmanyatiStatellevel™ineseltenetsinave beenjgeduced}fromitherActlandyare: pivotalito)

provisioniogjofanenabling environmentitoypeoplelinfected|withiLilV



oe

, Le Hy 1 “Non: ‘discrimination: ‘Non-discrimination’ is a a fundamental: principle’ of ail intémational ‘and, human.
Pa can i ’ jrights laws. There should be no discrimination at éstablishments on the basis of perceived or real Hiv.

: status. This protection is- provided. not only to an HIV positive person, but also. extends to immediate ° :
. - family members and progeny, whio reside or have residedi in. ine same house of HIV infected persont t09.:

2 “Here discrimination is ‘prohibited nat only against people infested with HIV and AIDS but also Agaiist
ne “people affected by HIV ‘and AIDS. This may include other people living, cohabiting and residing with’:
San HIV positive person. Italso' encompasses other people, who have lived, resided or cohabited with’
AnH HIV Positive person inthe past, OE OE a > (te he

a a

i : “A person cannot be discriminated on the basis of Hiv status at any setting and the following tenets!
Sor Ay require compliance, es a

. ed
”

eo 5 ; 3 wet “ ()Absence of discrimination at Employment and Occupation: Aperson should not be discriminated:

. ot Se, 7 in the establishments on the basis of HIV status. Discrimination here’ includes the denial of, or
Se SO L termination from, employment or occupation and also ‘unfair treatment at establishments. The
employer, may ‘also provide a reasonable. accommodation to people living with HIV if need be.
Reasonable accommodation means minor adjustments to a job or work that enables an HIV positive

__ person whois otherwise qualified to enjoy equal be benefits orto perform the essential functions of the job
: orwork, as thecasemay be.

Termination without reasonable accommodation should be an‘exception and should require
furnishing of various documents by the healthcare provider as well as the employer. A qualified
and independent healthcare provider who is competent should submit a copy of the written
assessment stating that the person poses a significant risk of transmission of HIV to other person
in the establishment or is unfit to perform the duties of the job. Employer should also submit a
copy of a written statement stating the nature and extent of administrative or financial hardship
for not providing the person reasonable accommodation.

(2) Healthcare and educational settings: A person should not be discriminated at healthcare and
educational setting on the basis of HIV status. Discrimination here includes unfair treatment,
denial or discontinuation of services in educational settings and healthcare settings.

(8) Public utilities and resources: A person should not be discriminated against using public
utilities and sharing resources on the basis of HIV status. Discrimination here includes denial or
discontinuation of access and usage of goods, accommodation, shops, public restaurants,
hotels and places of public entertainment, wells, tanks, bathing ghats, roads, burial grounds or
funeral ceremonies and places of public resort, etc.

(4) Holding public and private offices: Irrespective of HIV status, a person can hold public or
private offices and cannot be discriminated. Discrimination here includes the denial,
discontinuation or unfair treatment in the opportunity to stand for or hold public or private offices

iS)


7 : ick “Under custody: A person ‘should not be discriminaiéa and treated unfairly in goverhment/private & oye .
: “organisations on the basis of HIV status. Denial of access to or: unfair treatment i in government or. a
“private éstablishment j in whose care or custody a person may | be is prohibited. People who. are int .
“care and [custody of State have also been entitled to the right to HIV prevention, counselling, testing ©
Sand treatment: services in “accordance with: the Suidetines isstied by. National AIDS: Control”

"Organisation fem timetotime.. oo P aa “Eas ore e a

mee Dg cee ay vite ae wooNere efee tise . . . “yt tee

6) “Rigint to Movement: Right to mevement, is a fundainental right “énirustéd under’ article’ i9 of:
= Fundamental Rights of Part- IW of the Constitution. No person should be 2 denied ¢ or subjacted tc to.

7 oe EEE . : oe : oe
ae

o ‘Segregation: A pérson should not tbe sebregatid ‘on the basis of, HIV ‘status Thus, ste or rte ¢ or |
. others cannot be isolated and ostracizedo on nthe basis of HIV status. . ;

Wwe

SS:

"ee,

vga HIV testing 2 as pie- requisite: for obtaining eriployment i is, prohibited: “tiv testing as a pre
og NS ee * fequisite for obtaining employment, oraccessing healthcare servicés, education services or for the Me OL yee
, sh a s continuation” of ‘the same or for accessing ¢ or r using any, other service and faclity is completely... ‘, qa 4%

probes, PRES ee ag TE ee Se

: : - 5 . ot . ‘¢ ° -
ao tos . wee . pele a te fit tye Ne
on . wos : : Ay ' ;

yee te ae?

wees : i . ~ QQ) Right to residence: Ap person should not be denied or r treated unfairly with recara to the right oT
Bast a 7 “+. reside, purchase, rent and occupation of property. Every person infected with and affected by HIV a Ee ely
Ne should have the right not to be excluded from the shared household and right to enjoy and | use. oe
‘ facilities of such shared dhouseholdi in anon- iscriminatory manner. -

,

Discrimination against people infected with and affected by HIV and AIDS j is prohibited in all

.- occupational, educational and health settings and in addition, HIV test cannot be pre-requisite for

“+ obtaining employment or accessing healthcare services or education. Discrimination at
community places and for use of resources is also prohibited.

Incase of contravention of the aforesaid rights, a robust grievance redressal mechanism should be
provided in terms of Complaints Officer at establishments and Ombudsman in States. Aggrieved
person has a choice to file a complaint either with Complaints Officer or the Ombudsman. There is
no hierarchy with respect to filing of the complaint. Cognizance of offences under the Act will be
taken by the court of Judicial Magistrate First Class.



arses

ran "their Status Or, any other HIV-related information. HIV-related information means: any, information 3.”
+ relating to ‘the. HIV status of a person and includes: (a) information relating to the undertaking given “t

+ Confidentiality related to HIVs status: Hiv positive person cannot be forced to disclose her or his or”. ses

efor Performing the Hiv. test or result of an. HIV test; (b) i informnation telating to the care, support or
~: treatment. of that person; ©). information ‘which. -may’ ‘identify that? person; cand d) any, other :

: a » tiformation: concerning’ that! “person; Which" is’ collected, “received: “accessed or, recorded; ig’

\' “connection with an HIV test; HIV. treatment or HIV-related reseaich or the! Hiv status of that Person:

s st ae
‘

: oA “. an * f, S
. No person ‘should be conipélled to o disclose the AV’ Status except by ai an n order oft thé court that the oe

7 ‘disclosure of such information i is necessary inthe interest of fiustice for the determination ofi issues in’ : Paae
_ the matter before it. : a DOR OS, Cet wet

So. r . : ‘ . - : fo

; There i is a disclaimer in context ‘with relationship of fiduciary nature. Here no person should disclose .
‘the HIV status or any. other private information of the other person imparted i in confidence or in a’: ;
a relationship of a fiduciary nature except by informed consent. ‘The informed consent can be taken
from the person themselves or through their representatives. There are exceptions where informed,

~ consent for disclosure of HIV-related information i isnot required, -.

(1) In case the disclosure is made by a healthcare provider to another healthcare provider who is
involved in the care, treatment or counselling of such person.

(2) ‘By an order of acourt that the disclosure of such information is necessary. :

(3) In suits or legal proceedings between persons, where the disclosure of such information is
necessary and authorised legally.

(4) In relation to statistical information that could not be expected to lead to the identification of that
person.

(5) Forscreening purposes in any licensed blood bank.

(6) Officers of the Central Government or the State Government or State AIDS Control Society of the
concerned State Government for the purposes of monitoring, evaluation or supervision.

Disclosure of status to partner of HIV positive person: In case of disclosure of status to partner of
HIV positive person, no healthcare provider, except a physician or a counsellor, shall disclose the HIV
positive status of a person to their partner. This kind of disclosure can be made if,-

(1) The healthcare provider believes that the partner is at the significant risk of transmission of HIV
from sucha person.

(2) The HIV-positive person has been counselled to inform the partner.

(3) The healthcare provider is satisfied that the HIV positive person will not inform the partner.

(4) The healthcare provider has informed the HIV positive person of the intention to disclose the HIV-
positive status to the partner.

One more very important pre-condition is that the disclosure has to be made in person and after
proper counselling. The healthcare provider shall have no obligation to identify or locate the
partner of an HIV- positive person.



OF estabishment keeping” the records. ‘oF HIV-related information ; “should . adopt’ data protection -

are ae Information which may identify that person; and «:. 7 vets

:.\) “jpformation from disclosure, procedures for accessing information, provision for security systemstto - vet

“Ine case of éstablishments, “educational, scoipationdl p prison settings, faith: based organisations, £° ane
+ eorporaté-houses, -etc., iti is the ‘responsibility of employers to énsure that alt staff members are” Loe a
: oriented’ on :Conicepts. of consent, ‘disclosure and confidentiality related to HIV and AIDS and that: e .
. they don’ t disclosé HiV-related information: “itt Is also the moral responsibilty 0 of co- “workers and”

“other Staff members to not engage in activities which bréach confidentiality... “AS we .

Om. . Be ot ; on : an ye Pan ee a,

~ Confidentiality of ‘data: relatéd to Hiv: Hilverdlated information is sensitive’ in nature and every ©

; Measures tot ensure prevention of unintended | or ‘unwanted disclosure and breach of. confidentiality»
“ of the datay- ae They Tar CTE Se oe ES de
HIV-related information includes me See ce CE e a :
2@ Jnformation relating to the undertaking pérforming the Hiv testor resuit ofa an HIV test;
(0) Information relating to the care, support or treatment ofthat person bet Moy os, a a mh

We *
- lt bse ae

> . , cag
af " . - ft a ey
af ty we 4 4

‘(d) Any other information concerning that person, which i is collected, feceived, ‘accessed, or recorded i in:
- .Gonnection with an HIV test, HIV treatment or HIV-related research and the HlVstatus of that} person. os

- att woos oe aan noe . woe ; soe ‘ mv ve tr, Lo tw, viet, ; “ ‘h.:

7 Iti is srriandatory for ‘every. establistiment keeping the records of HIV-related information of protected’. - a gt!
vs “persons to adopt ‘data: protection measures. Data’ protection: measures - .include- protecting » -

: protect the information stored i in any form and mechanisms to ensure accountability and lability 0 of oo Maes
- personsin the establishment. ee vat Oe, - : eye

(1) Protecting information from’ disclosure of. HIV-related information: Confidentiality and .
privacy is to be maintained while collecting HIV-related information. For each establishment
which has collected/ is desirous of collection of HIV-related information pertaining to protected

. persons, authorised persons or staff should sign an undertaking for confidentiality of the
“information.

(2) ‘Access to HIV-related information: Access should be granted only to authorized persons or
staff. There should be provision. of signing a formal undertaking for confidentiality of the
information from the authorised person. .

Provision for security systems for HIV-related information: There should be secured almirahs

or cabinet for physical records like registers, reports etc. and it should be carefully locked when

left unattended. Personal computers or mobiles or tablets or any other hardware should be
password protected and should be logged off or locked when left unattended for protecting
electronic records,

(4) Data Management Committee: Data Management Committee should be formed at each

establishment to review and provide appropriate recommendation regarding the data security

measures and the Data Management Committee should be responsible to ensure the same.

Wherever establishment does not have the Data Management Committee, the head of the

establishment should be entrusted with the responsibility and function of the Data Management

Commitiee.

Disposal of HIV-related information: Establishment should have standard operating procedures

in place regarding disposal of physical and electronic records or files containing HIV-related

information of protected persons.

(6) Accountability and liability of security of HIV: related information should be with Data
Management Committees or the heads of concerned establishment.

(3

—

(5

—

For additional information, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (National AIDS Control Organisation's)
guidelines and official website may be referred to from time to time.


ay sores : Poin . cles eost ‘ Pn . Soe va my * aan .

. ea ay are eer ers Co feat. eT we a sre oa ‘

‘ . rs “ we : Me . woe * wey . on ee ry
a - saat ~ ot ale *} "he wo of cae ba a “ . teet wee Mere, :
ate . . ae te . " . e tet

: an Oy ; Gtievanicé redréssal mechanism i is vital in order: to provide a ‘holistic non- :discriminatory environment to®.
-pedple infected with and affected by HIV and ‘AIDS: The Act also propdses a robust mechanisi in the
form of! FComplaints Officer at establistiments and 1 Ombudsman at State level. ° ao a PA ae ae

7 ft ste
. 7 . s "6 . . rind
s , Nay, Coe, foe awe

“Iti is ‘Spligatory for ihe stablishmént, faving one y hundred or ‘tore persons to designate a person,’ ‘as sit! 8
' i. ‘deems fit, as the Complaints Officer’ who. shall dispose’ of complaints of. violations of the provisions of this’
Act i in the establishment. Healthcare establishments Shall. designate a. ‘Complaints Officer. in case’ ‘of.
* <twenty ¢ Or, more persons. ‘Here person could be’ an employes or officer. or member or director. or trustee’ or.
whe os < Manager, as the case may be.: Similarly, at State level, one or. more. Ombudsman’ shall be appointed or. * i.
: 7 oy “designated as the State desires. Ombudsman shall i inquire into complaints of violations of provisions ¢ of ‘oP
"the Act related to discrimination: and Providing of healtheare s services. : f :

a It must be noted ‘that there is no 10 hierarchy i in terms of filing of. complaint; “if any establishment does not ron Be Le
‘qualify to havea Complaints Officer, then the aggrieved person belonging to that establishment canfilea’ :.

. complaint to the Ombudsman. Also, if the establishment has a Complaints Officer, it is at the discretion of
. the aggrieved person to file the compliant to the Complaints Officer or Ombudsman. .

" Complaints ¢ Officer: Duty, Power and Responsibility:
(1) Acceptance of complaints: Complaints Officer has to register the complaint. The complaint
--has to be made within three months from the date that the person making the complaint became.
aware of the alleged violation of the Act in the establishment. If the Complaints Officer is satisfied
of circumstances that prevented the complainant from making the complaint within the
stipulated period, extension of another three months should be granted.

(2) Assistance in filing complaint: Every complaint would be made to the Complaints Officer in
writing in the Form annexed at Appendix A. Where a complaint cannot be made in writing the
Complaints Officer shall render all reasonable assistance to the complainant to file the complaint
in writing.

(3) Acknowledgement and registration of complaints: The Complaints Officer on receipt of a
complaint should provide an acknowledgment to the complainant and record the complaint in
electronic form. The time of the complaint and the action taken on the complaint should also be
recorded. Every complaint should be numbered sequentially. The Complaints Officer should act
in an objective and independent manner while deciding complaints made under the Act.

(4) Timeline for decision making: The Complaints Officer should arrive at a decision of the
complaint promptly and in any case within seven working days. In case of emergency or in the
case of healthcare establishments where the complaint relates to discrimination in the provision
of, or access to health care services or provision of Universal Precautions, the Complaints Officer
should decide the complaint on the same day on which he receives the complaint.


- fe Dééision making F powers: The Coifptaints ottice? if satisfied that ¢ a 2 violation of the At’ nds |
taken place as alleged i in the complaint, should fi irstly, direct the establishment to take measures ,
: to rectify the Violation; Secondly, counsel the person who has comniitted the violation and require
— - such ° ‘person to ‘undergo. training in ‘relation to” “HIV, and Albs; Provisions’ ‘of, the Act, rules,
° “guidelines and aspects of stigma and discrimination. Additionally, social service ‘should be done“
for’ a ‘fixed period, which shoilldinclude working with a non- governmental ‘organisation working
“on HIV and AIDS. For this, assistance from réspective District ‘AIDS Prevention and Control Unit ».
“or ‘StateAIDS Control Society should be undertaken. Upon subsequent violation of the Act bythe’ : v :
‘same person,, ‘the Complaints Officer t may recommend. ‘the establishment t to take disciplinary .
: : vt action in naccordance with the Jaw, : ey ;

é ., : an | oo eof Le of ‘ ha

t ao

0 toring: ‘thé 8 ‘complainant The 5 Compiaints Officer: should. intern the’ complainant ‘of, the . Mer

~action taken’ in relation to: ‘the. complaint’ and of ‘the. complainant's right to. approach, the “ 2
Ombudsman or to’ any” other appropriate legal r recourse in case; ‘the complainant is dissatisfied « ‘
th the action taken.: Mb a4 ‘s -

on wwf

S: ot os ’ =): Reporting Mechanism: ‘The Complaints Officer shall ensure e that the complaint; its nattire and.” a qe are
-~ ee : : SS te number and: ‘the action taken are reported to. the appropriate’ ‘authority’ ‘urider the’ Central ” “ . . ue
eb ee Government (Deputy’ Director General, Information Education ‘and Communication or Director :’ a “ “ oa
‘ . ae a ‘Administration, Natinal AIDS Control Organisation) every six months. In case there are ce 7 : Ly
aa 7 ae complaintsin last sixmonths, submission of a: ‘nil report’ isnota compulsion. “ : Te es dy

-"@). Confidentiality: The Complaints Officer if requested by the complainant should ensure the .
protection of the identity of the protected person in the following manner, namely -

. (@) The Complaints Officer should file one copy of the document bearing the full name, identity
and identifying details of such protected person which shall be kept in a sealed cover rand | in
-* safe custody with the Complaints Officer.
(b) The Complaints Officer shall provide pseudonyms to protected person involved | in
complaints before them.
(c) The identity and identifying details of the complainant should not be revealed by any person
or their representatives including assistants and staff.

(9) Data Management: The Complaints Officer shall comply with the data protection measures in
accordance with the section 11 of the HIV and AIDS (Prevention and Control) Act, 2017 and
Guidelines on Confidentiality of Data of protected persons there under. Section 5.3 of the HIV
and AIDS Policy for Establishments may also be referred to.


KeyiStrategiesyand|Responsibilityyorthelstakeholderss
Employers¥Employeestetcs

tee Te . a - a ~ see “) be ‘ Lo of cae oe So pt Nt . rent yore Se lecece ;
er . “oe woo. the ’ . , . . eae tl . .
Pom Ste dee ce ¢

7 a pet “In order to assure effective iniplementation, of the Policy, Ministries/Departments, ‘Employer associations! st .
a con establishments including employers, employees; administrative staff and also HIV Positive people! have a ; oe
ee pivotal role to play. a Cor ORD pe ake oa oy ;

ve

4 dh Prevent of HIV: irasmission ‘and arg and shppor to Hv infected workforce.

“te
wo ‘

. - @) ‘Awareness generation’ or training on basics of HIV, routes ‘of transmission, undoing’ myths and:
vi * misconceptions, behayior change, Universal Precaiution, Post Exposure Prophylaxis. Oh,

G) Integration of HIV comporiént. at trainings of humari resource department, “welfare measures,” fe as
‘ Corporate Social responsibility etc. oe ER, ae wep ee ne Venn

ae : (4) Zerd-discrimination Policy on the basis of HIV status atevery establishment. adaptexiity and” 7
a . _ - provide reasonable accommodation for People Living with HM. oe yh

: (5) Grievance redressal mechanism to look into cases of discrimination.

sg So (6) Widen scope of social security coverage to include HIV i in assistance programmes, heath ae
mo , "insurance etc. :

) Strengthening of existing interventions and setting up of newer interventions for informal sector
. workers and migrant workers based on vulnerability studies and risk assessment. :

- tone (8): ‘Enhance access to condoms, treatment of sexually transmitted infections, Universal .
Precautions and Post Exposure Prophylaxis for HIV. ;

(9) Undertake epidemiological surveillance at the establishment to gather data or - information for
taking informed Policy and programmatic decisions.

2. Role ofEmployer Associations or Chamber or Industries:

(1) Employer associations or chambers or industries are encouraged to implement the guiding
principles defined under the establishment policy.

(2) Employer associations or chambers or industries to encourage large member companies to set
up HIV counselling or testing or treatment facilities and also appropriate funds under Corporate
Social Responsibility for provisioning of welfare measures like skill-development, livelihood
generation etc.

(3) Employer associations or chambers or industries should undertake advocacy efforts to mobilize
their member companies in implementing the establishment policy.

(4) Employer associations or chambers or industries to partner with National AIDS Control
Organisation or State AIDS Control Society for enhancing coverage of the establishment Policy
and setting up public private partnerships for HIV prevention and care.

(5) Employer organisations or chambers should strengthen their capacity, in partnership with
National AIDS Control! Society or State AIDS Control Society and relevant agencies, to be able to
offer technical assistance to their members for starting HIV and AIDS workplace programmes.
Also, information on HIV and AIDS could be integrated as part of their capacity building modules.

2


3 _ Role of of Employers including the administrative staff: . noe oe oa
os (M: :Impiementation, of. guiding principles’ definéd i in the Policy:: Employer: will hive té érisure .
that. no employee is: ‘discriminated, on the: basis: of HIV. status ‘and that ‘all the five ‘Guiding

:: Principles are being implemented in ‘spit. ‘Employer! has to ensure’ acess of the Policy to wider:

: eee ~ public by uploading iton the website.’ Employer also has to ensure that no person, is denied or”
. : terminated from. employment, because of HIV. statils. Any. other form. of discrimiriation like, :
7 avoiding talking to that person, sharing of meas, “travelling étc. is also fully prohibited. if need «.
“be, employer should’ ‘ensure provisioning. of: reasonable « accommodation’ ‘where’ minor’ ee | oo
oy adjustments at work’ would enable HIV: positive | person ‘to enjoy equal benefits at work. Here
ss, discrifnination free. behavior. is not ‘limited to. person ‘infected with, HIV: and AIDS but also , =

‘ implementing ‘other principles including, confi dentiality, Universal’ Precautions and. grievance. :

oa redressal mechanism. Every establishment éngaged in healthcare Servicés has to: make | sure “ .
sf that no HIV testing! is done without informed consent, except forr reasons ‘mentioned urider the ‘v

; hivand AIDS (Prevention and (Contra) Act, 2017. : He ; orek a, ek Ee

a =): "Reguldr capacity building of staff memberson basies of the Hilvand AIDS (Preventionand.» os mg
ee _ ey ve fs Control)’ Act, 2017: Employer has to make provisions for training of. staff members. on the” ‘ . bs : i
ee o basics ‘of HIV-and ‘AIDS, transmission of HIV, myths: and: misconceptions, ‘three guiding : “,
principles with focus ori non: discrimination and the HIV and AIDS (Prevention and Control) Act, -. a
-.. 2017. Employers engaged in healthcare .Services have to take appropriate measure for % a per
_ informing and educating people on use of Universal Precautions and Post Exposure . oa
an Prophylaxis to people who are at significant risk of occupational exposure to HIV. Employers.
can contact nearby District AIDS Prevention and Control Units or State AIDS Control Society for
further necessary help. i ;

(3) : Designation of Complaints Officer:
(a) Any establishment having hundred or more persons, may designate a person of senior
rank, as it deems fit, as the Complaints Officer;

(b) Healthcare establishments, having twenty or more persons may also designate a
‘Complaints Officer. Complaints Officer shall dispose of the complaints with regard to
violation of the provisions of the HIV and AIDS (Prevention and Control) Act, 2017 in the
establishment;

(c) While computing the total strength of an establishment, all employees, officers, members,
directors, trustees or managers may be included.

(4) Training of Complaints Officer:
(a) The establishment has to ensure that the designated Complaints Officer is trained for
carrying out the responsibilities efficiently;
(b) Employer may seek assistance from State AIDS Control Society for conducting training;
(c) HIV and AIDS Module developed for Complaints Officer by Ministry Of Health And Family
Welfare shall be made available to the State AIDS Control Society.

(5) Maintenance of confidentiality:
(a) Theestablishmentis obligated to maintain confidentiality in terms of identity and identifying
details of the protected person involved in a complaint before the Complaints Officer and
any information shall not be revealed by any person or his representatives including staff;


“(b): ; The establishment has to ensure that no person shall print or publish any matte in ‘relation

ia wy wt rs 7 ie 4 ito. a ‘complaint béfore a Complaint offi cer ‘unless the identity, of the ® complainant in the :
ak 3. 5° -“complaintis protected; boos! od ERs os aren mse S Perea room oN
aoe 7 ‘6 The establishment: and Complaints Stlicat shall comply: with data protection measures in. 4

oan *.

Se accordance with the provisions of section 1 1 of the HIV and AIDS (Prevention and Corral) © He
mee : E , Me » pct, 2017 and Guidelines on ' Confidentiality of Data’ of protected Persons. there under.
ad a "Section 5.3 of the Model Policy) may also be referred to. . ete al!

Ff we .
a - a a af aN so Teed ‘ »
im la

wee es ron

oe 0 Functioning ofthe office of Complaints Officers? oe Le RS St Ba
a a e There shall be Establishments to establish a ‘method for. réceipt of complaints i in n electronic’ ce :
_ form either ‘through dedicated website, webpage or by providing an official email addréss a
for. the submission” of complaints to” “the Complaints, Officer “for. further clarity on ¥ i
development of website, or link, establishriént to contact. trespective State AIDS Contro se
Societies; 38 RN ES i es cere, a = " aes
“(0y “Un: addition, the aétablishment Shall also’ provide necessary facilities for’ ihe Complaints ms ,
pyre Officer for’ deciding the complaint; ‘and also: make available such information as thie’ vb
Ss oa . " Gomplaints Offcermay require adcresingthecomplaint: Pre” Rn ie
ee O. ‘Awareness generation: Every ‘establishment which requires appointing a 2 Complaints Officer’ * :
, “ me a Ooé, shall on‘an annual basis, organise workshops and awareness programmes for sensitizing its’ a
S a o voor. ‘employees with the provisions of the Act and Policy. Sensitization to also ‘include functioning of,
Sep - grievance redressal mechanism including who can file a complaint, on what basis complaint can °

‘be filed, how the complaint can be filed etc: Contact details of the Complaints Officer to be made -

- available to the peoplea atthe establishment. ot et he,
' Te 4.) ' Role of Employees or co-workers: ,
‘ “(1) Asa co- -worker it is the responsibility of the person tonot discriminate against colleagues: on the
basis of HIV status. ; md aan

(2) Employees also have to ensure that the HIV status if known to them i is not disclosed to anjone
- without informed consent of the HIV positive person.
(3) If they are witness to any form of discrimination against person. on the basis of HIV status, they
~ should discourage such behavior and advise the person to file a complaint with Complaints
Officer at the organisation level or Ombudsman at the State level.
(4) Employees cannot disclose the personal details including name and address of the person living
with HIV to anyone including the employer, family members, other employees or media agencies.

5, Roleof person infected with HIV:

(1) Person infected with HIV, if discriminated, should file a complaint either with Complaints Officer at
establishment where the person is working at or with the Ombudsman at State or District level.

(2) Every complaint should be made in writing in the Form set provided on respective establishment
or State website. Complaint can also be made via post, telephonically, or in electronic form, but
at the end it has to be translated to the Complaint Form. Where a complaint cannot be made in
writing, it is the responsibility of the Complaints Officer to render all reasonable assistance to the
complainant to file the complaint in writing.

(3) The complaints should be made within three months from the date the complainant became
aware of the alleged violation of the Act in the establishment. If the Complaints Officer is
satisfied that circumstances prevented the complainant from making the complaint within the
stipulated period, then the time limit to make the complaint may be extended by a further period
of three months.


My a ay, Person infected with HIV has aduty to prevent Hansrtission ot HIV. Every person, ‘hike SHIV © * woN
an 7 ney ue mre We - positive and has been counselled i in accordance with the guidelines issuéd oris aware ofthe .. Sf
SE es ar “nature of HIV, and its transmission, shall take, all reasonablé precautions’ to: prevent the’. .
aa transmission, ‘6t Hiv to other persons. The parson should adopt stfategies for the reduction ~.

ose! ' ‘of risk or ‘informing i in advance his Hiv status before any’ ‘sexual contact with any /person or” -
ey “with: whom needles are shared with...” cr eee a re pee

va La vhee 2 tes Sooty

wt

wee my % way . ao, . wag . - noe . sg td : “? tee
~ ‘: ad . md nthe

6 . . Réle of Ministry of Health and Family’ ‘Welfare (National AIDS Coritiol Organisation) and State’ ae ;
P AIDS Control Societies: Ministry of Health: and Family Welfare (National AIDS Control Organisation) -* :

Ay «to ‘facilitate regular surveys and risks, assessment studies to map the vulnerable populations; their; 3. ve
2 “work habits and’ preferences, working conditions, ‘perceptions and other. related issues. These Pe
: studies undertaken’ will facilitate j in effective implementation of the Policy, ways of dissemination, . Les
: _ \identification. of work areas requiring focus: from Ministry of Health’ and, Family Welfare’ (Natiorial

AIDS Control Organisation) and also facilitate the monitoring off implementation of the Policy at and its

(i ‘all State Council on 1 AIDS tor ensure adequate representation of the 6 state about departments, » 7 te at

Sa employers’ and workers! organisations, ©) eh Re. on a Bt OS

. : 7 " .{2) ‘All States to hold meetings of Legislators Forum ¢ on HI and AIDS ‘each year anid members of “, . : : Pe ; °
RN ir : _ ye oi Legislators Forum on HIV and AIDS to ensuiré that the Policy for éstabishmentsisimplemented. . : . wy
wa 8 ote, in their respective States. ne res > ae oP

_ (8) States to hold regular meetings with employer associations and State labour department to
oe ensure setting up of grievance redressal mechanism in the form of Complaints Officer and —
: effective implementation of the Policy. - os : : we )
-(4) Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (National AIDS Control Organisation) or State AIDS
.- Control. Society to ensure periodic ’ reviewing ‘and monitoring of the Policy and provide
“* necessary handholding for various adjustments and customisation required due to constantly
changing interna! and external situation.



Form)formaking|Complaintito;Complaints/Officer

ya Personjinstitutionfresponsiblefomtneyincident

SignatureathumbylmpressionyorcomplainantaNames

FonOfticialUsetonly:

(‘ComplaintiNumbers

aWherejtheycomplaintiistreceivediorallyfomtelephonicallyfand|reduced}tojwriting)
the\Complaints\OfficersthelComplaints|Ofticemshallisignfand{datejthe|Eorms wv



FIGs YOur
SSicllisnment
ClESIGINGtSc] G
Compleints Ciitear?

Complaints |
Officer

As per Section 21 of the HIV & AIDS (P & C) Act, 2017,
If you are an establishment with 100 or more people or a healthcare establishment
with 20 or more people, you shall designate a Complaints Officer


National AIDS Control Organisation

India's response to HIV & Sexually Transmitted Infections

Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Government of India
www.naco.gov.in
