rest Fo So Weto-33004/99 REGD. NO. D.L.-33004/99

The Gazette of India

EXTRAORDINARY
WT WI—avs 3—s-avs (ii)
PART II—Section 3—Sub-section (ii)

wiftrart @ wari
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
a 328] aad faecit, Yat, Watt 20, 2009/HTETT 1, 1930
No. 328] NEW DELHI, FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 20, 2009/PHALGUNA 1, 1930
qatar sit at Aaa re fram, faa der nied stk aaa wien at
afer HATHA C;
ad facett, 20 Head, 2009 d:, Fa SAT WER, Wala (dem) afi,

x 1986 (1986 =I 29) (fad Set Fah Wald Sat suis
’ Wael ey 8 Sa aE aK AM ae A eM S sa
3 ait, tim at ate Be TT eS ean wea faut strata wit a rea aed SI
TS SSS, AMIR Seales SX area WET SH Seay
A ga a ser at TAT eB, 1, waRRraREOT BT TAFE WEN HA ELH BIT
sik + a afe atk faa wife ‘wets tim at afer wifseaen (fra yaa

scant & af 3 are fea, ar vedio, aft SHH Wa Waser Her Tas) SA a aa VT |

syatt ak faga sears Oy Tact ST wet AAT Het HT ATT Bik 2, MRTRTT BT TEMA FH FEA
Ufreaedt ait st ya amet at oraganat wl ca A tad ae eect A ett |
Ete 3, WRIT ort Tero Frafafad weed
an, frafatad aa st srearavanat e a ferret HT, BU —
(me) cae fra ak veer @ fae afar (ae) wart ea seat
eoia wrraa B agrat Og Wel Aherd gest (a) asa wish a || etree
STR TT ASS Wat WENT STAT BK . /
eat st Bead HET; ax (1) atafart ae
(a) wa at wed hie Se S setae BT (a) trata wed fase At ar ae
aa F gaan aRfeattata aera ait vate (=) awe dare At a eee
GT Se ST SE CT (Sata fag aa
ain, tim aa Swart wee Sa sie Mat H fearz (o) setae atid sit abv acer

aaa ak wa aan S ae sae S Aerie A fare

685 GI/2009 (1)


2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY

(St) soe, ars Sart Wet AA
(a) yer, saTES TRF AEST
(A) Werth, Sat wee Tt Hey
(Z) Fert, faer — Tey AEey
_ (3) Fert, ares A WaT
(3) qe, vikay aa —uet Wee
(3) west, walaw ak aA It Wee
Harta
(4) afaa, dala vata sik IAF AEE

4 8, faa tn aa et Serra & wna BA at Arey
é, feet wa a afte qeadhal at we wee SOT
aeatind Ht Ge;

Weg, Ue ak fe wien aenerafaad, wa at orfiren
eae dial at wea wees S wa A aetna a wT ;

We, Ue a tt fH wits te wae ae ww
Seq at TET, Mt Aa Perr wa faa, valawila
afaient, Sa-aER sik US aa sal HS fastug zi

4, Witter at wfadat sit pea—(1) sadad
afaran & sre @ seats wife al ta at saa
WEN Hh WA SoM St Tad fara BH arava F
ghana wim act a dam wp fore sara aval a
wast |

(2) fasta wa 8 sik wo ta (1) B sade at
Sara UK viet Was Set fan, ta saat F Freafafad
FS at a ae saa Wiha et, Baiq —

(ar) am act St Sena TAG tat Sik sed
ale waan al des, Fafa eel sit soe
wm Beara a wal Aiea wees ator aT fara
aot Graal cl fares wen sik te ay
sk wae fore Gata a;

(@) aa al yam sik wala a gfe @ aad

fasta yPiizad eet @ seer Stim at A

wet at Prete F fee ra afefeerferenta
Fels BHT SARE;

Cn) wate at afte S aaa Aet Seat Ht ara B]
@ fu neat seat, WaT Ba STIR,
ag ae Aart st Mat, WA af det ae

[Part H—Sec. 3(ii)]

ak at te suai & dae ated A zat F
faa Wer eet SR Foned we & fear saa
SW HT;

(a) wae A alata wear S daft Ga HT
(S) A wat S valerie wean sit Gam a
(a) miter 4 fifea oral & fraraaa & far,
(3) Gren sk gat, ast wea dae sik

fase Acar Me Woe Sled Her eT

(a) tad a yea Fann, aan sik Sa

fax fee wet ae fats area aera
fran f farsa Ht Aimed sit sen;
ait

(a) san afer at ons & ala sodad ot
ae fast Hel B wa sie Peet SH Was
fore wit set seeeal at wit we few
Tava aya shaq Was |

(3) wife at wifetai sik pea feat ata areray

wy afer, Mt Talacr (acer) aiferan, 1986 (1986
wl 29) @ Saat SH sana et Bi, S aes teal a wea
frat wfad ue vitae wate Stet fat BA I

(4) wit wT aE ak Saw Gea A fafea

wiada al ear H vad EU sa-Fa (1) ste se-Fa (2) F
Siete faframen sik frsrarerH art at daira HoT |

5, wWifenrut at dah —wite art dant ated
ST ARR He & fee set via farrafaa at |

6, WiRTeAcoT at sitenritar afta at saftreariear
wa wet Bre tat aT wel aed 3, sal oars se
ford tim at Ht WAS Gert Afeal S aire ti aah SH WaT
TT SRT SK Wa se wise 4 wha sar
farreaa at, am faanita er |

7, Tint Wat Sat Wuret Wegner say sity Arar
Arte HET. atten a aat pH wat Wea SIMA
ak dam arte Set S fere sot wad aT da frafaa
SUT ak Fe was & fae sat afer st on 5 F
aeat Freer St BOT |


(am W-w@vs 3(ii)]

8, Wifetencot car ard — afer ere aren farirad
tat wRasrret, arisai sik aq fran at featrad
wea wh fal Hala GR EI Wa fey We Wt HI UA
arta ei |

9, Wifeatat at Weare sit dariet area —
Miftem at qatar wd ay Hara, a fe alec Aaa
enn, werahie sit dedtet walt soerer SUT |
Wier at Foil a fara @ fee wn cata dr
fanaa AUT |

10, Tea Tat Ptarot wikrentont Ar Wea.—aa fra
waraa an fearan & faa geass at seaer Wa
Wiad Ht VHA S I

11, Ter A eres Weer usta am vet ahr
wit grr dae at we wate Afar weer ahr A
TAR WT, WA Wa se Wate wiseowt a Area a
AS cai Wa w few Hey Sareiit |

(a. B-12011/17/2008-wIsRaSt-11]
weita wie, dyad ahaa
MINISTRY OFENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
NOTIFICATION
New Delhi, the 20th February, 2009

S.O. 521(E).—Whereas the river Ganga is of unique
importance ascribed to reasons that are geographical,
historical, socio-cultural and economic giving it the status
of a national river;

And whereas the river Ganga has been facing serious
threat due to discharge of increasing quantities of sewage
effluents, trade effluents and other pollutants on account
of rapid urbanisation and industrialisation;

And whereas the demand for river water is growing
for irrigation, drinking purposes, industrial use and power
due to increase in population, urbanisation, industrialisation
and growth in infrastructure, and taking into account the
need to meet competing demands;

’ And whereas there is urgent need,—

(a) to ensure effective abatement of pollution and
conservation of the river Ganga by adopting a
river basin approach to promote inter-sectoral
co-ordination for comprehensive planning and
management; and

(b) to maintain minimum ecological flows in the river
Ganga with the aim of ensuring water quality
and environmentally sustainable development;

And whereas it is required to have a planning,
financing, monitoring and coordinating authority for
strengthening the collective efforts of the Central and the
State Governments for effective abatement of pollution and
conservation of the river Ganga;

ART ST Usa : AAA 3

Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred
by sub-sections (1) and (3) of Section 3 of the Environment
(Protection) Act, 1986 (29 of 1986) (hereinafter referred to
as the said Act), the Central Government hereby constitutes

‘the Authority mentioned below for taking measures for
effective abatement of pollution and conservation of the .
river Ganga.

1. Name of the Authority.—The Authority so
constituted by the Central Government shall be known as
the "National Ganga River Basin Authority’ (hereinafter
referred to as the Authority).

2. Headquarters of :the Authority.—The

“headquarters of the Authority shall be at New Delhi.

3. Composition of the Authority.—The Authority
shall consist of the following members, namely:—

(a) Prime Minister —ex officio Chairperson

(b) Union Minister, —ex officio Member
Environment and Forests

(c) Union Minister, Finance —ex officio Member

(d) Union Minister, Urban —ex officio Member

Development

(e) Union Minister, —ex officio Member

Water Resources

() Union Minister, Power —ex officio Member

(g) Union Minister, —ex officio Member
Science and Technology

(h) Deputy Chairman, —ex officio Member

Planning Commission

@) Chief Minister,
Uttarakhand

G) Chief Minister,
Uttar Pradesh

{k) Chief Minister, Bihar —ex officio Member

(1) Chief Minister, Jharkhand —ex officio Member

(m) Chief Minister,
West Bengal

(n) Minister of State,
Environment and Forests —ex officio Member

(©) Secretary, Union Ministry —ex officio Member
of Environment and Forests Secretary:

—ex officio Member

—ex officio Member

—ex officio Member

Provided that the Authority may co-opt one or morc
Chief Ministers from any of the States having major
tributaries of the river Ganga, which are likely to affect the
water quality in the river Ganga, as ex officio Member:

Provided further that the Authority may also co-opt
one or more Union Ministers as may be required, as ex
officio Member:

Provided also that the Authority may also co-opt up
to five members who are experts in the fields of river


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—Sec. 3(ii)]
ART SEC. S(ii)]

conservation, hydrology, environmental engineering, social
mobilization and such other fields.

4. Powers and Functions of the Authority.—.(1)
Subject to the provisions of the said Act, the Authority
shall have the power to take all such measures and discharge
functions as it deems necessary or expedient for effective
abatement of pollution and conservation of the river Ganga
in keeping with sustainable development needs.

’ (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the
generality of the provisions of sub-paragraph (1), such
measures may include measures with respect to all or any
of the following matters, namely: —

(a) development of river basin management plan
and regulation of activities aimed at the
prevention, control and abatement of pollution
in the river Ganga to maintain its water quality,
and to take such other measures relevant to river
ecology and management in the Ganga Basin
States;

(b) maintenance of minimum ecological flows in the
river Ganga with the aim of ensuring water
quality and environmentally sustainable
development;

(c) measures necessary for planning, financing and
execution of programmes for abatement of
pollution in the river Ganga including
augmentation of sewerage infrastructure,
catchment area treatment, protection of flood
plains, creating public awareness and such other
measures for promoting environmentally
sustainable river conservation;

(d) collection, analysis and dissemination of
information relating to environmental pollution
in the river Ganga;

(€) investigations and research regarding problems
of environmental pollution and conservation of
the river Ganga;

(f) creation of special purpose vehicles, as
appropriate, for implementation of works vested
with the Authority; .

(g) promotion of water conservation practices
including recycling and reuse, rain water
harvesting, and decentralised sewage treatment
systems;

(h) monitoring and review of the implementation of
various programmes or activities taken up for
prevention, control and abatement of pollution
in the river Ganga; and

@ issuance of directions under Section 5 of the
said Act for the purpose of exercising and
performing all or any of the above functions
and to take such other measures as the

Authority deems necessary or expedient for
achievement of its objectives.

(3) The powers and functions of the Authority shall
be without prejudice to any of the powers conferred upon
the States under any Central or State Act, being not
inconsistent with the provisions of the Environment
(Protection) Act, 1986 (29 of 1986).

(4) The Authority shall combine regulatory and
developmental functions as stated in sub-paragraphs (1)
and (2), keeping in view the powers vested with the State
Governments and their institutions.

5. Meetings of the Authority.—The Authority may
regulate its own procedures for transacting its business
including its meetings.

6. Jurisdiction of the Authority.—The jurisdiction
of the Authority shall extend to the States through which
the river Ganga flows, namely, Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh,
Bihar, Jharkhand and West Bengal and such other States,
having major tributaries of the river Ganga, as the Authority
may decide for the purpose of effective abatement of
pollution and conservation of the river Ganga.

7. Monitoring of effective abatement of pollution and
conservation of the river Ganga.—The Authority may
evolve its own’ mechanism for monitoring of effective
abatement of pollution and conservation of the river Ganga
and issue directions thereof under Section 5 of the said
Act for the said purpose.

8. Corpus of the Authority.—There shall be a corpus
of funds provided by the Central Government for
implementing such projects, programmes and other
activities as may be decided by the Authority,

9. Administrative and technical support to the
Authority.—The Authority shall be provided
administrative and technical Support by the Ministry of
Environment and Forests, which shall be the nodal
Ministry. The Authority may evolve an appropriate
mechanism for implementation of its decisions.

10. Constitution of State River Conservation
Authorities.—The State Governments concerned may
constitute a State Ganga River Conservation Authority
under the Chairmanship of the Chief Minister with such
composition and such powers as deemed fit for coordinating
and implementing the river conservation activities at the
State level.

11. Comprehensive management in the State.-—
Based on the integrated basin management plan drawn by
the National Ganga River Basin Authority, the State
Governments shall take steps for comprehensive
management of the river in the State through their respective
Authorities.

[No. A-12011/ 17/2008-NRCD-1]]
RAJIV GAUBA, Jt. Secy.

Printed by the Manager, Govt. of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064
and Published by the Controller of Publications, Dethi-1 10054,
