TO BE PUBLISHED IN GAZETTE OF INDIA: EXTRAORDINARY
[PART I SECTION 1]

No.26(1)/2019-IPHW

Government of India
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology

Se ake ate ate ake of

New Delhi, Dated: 25" February, 2019

NOTIFICATION

Subject: National Policy on Electronics 2019 (NPE 2019)

1. PREAMBLE

1.1.

Electronics industry is the world’s largest and fastest growing industry and is
increasingly finding applications in all sectors of the economy. The Government
attaches high priority to electronics hardware manufacturing and it is one of the
important pillars of both “Make in India” and “Digital India” programmes of
Government of India. Besides the economic imperative, focus on electronics
hardware manufacturing up to the integrated circuit or chip level is required due to
the growing security concerns. The ESDM industry is of strategic importance as
well. India is a signatory to the Information Technology Agreement (ITA-1) of
WTO and Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) with various countries/ trading blocs
such as ASEAN, Korea and Japan. However, the electronics hardware
manufacturing sector faces lack of level playing field vis-a-vis competing nations
on account of several disabilities which render domestic electronics hardware
manufacturing uncompetitive. These inter-alia include lack of adequate
infrastructure, domestic supply chain and logistics; high cost of finance; inadequate
availability of quality power; inadequate components manufacturing base; limited
design capabilities and focus on R&D by the industry; and inadequacies in skill

development.


1.2.

1.3.

1.4.

Building India’s capacity in core technology development (Design and Intellectual
Property (IP)) requires deeper consideration. It is noteworthy that standards
development, product design or IP development (semiconductor/ systems) and
semiconductor manufacturing are increasingly becoming important and improving
India’s participation in this league must be a major priority for the country, at least
from the national security angle. In the case of building Design and IP based
technology companies, the large investments needed and difficulty in competing
with established Multinational Corporations (MNCs) is a significant barrier.
Building semiconductor fabrication capabilities in India is essential to break into

this segment.

Recognizing the electronics sector’s unique dynamics, significant opportunities,
and structural challenges, the Government of India notified the National Policy on
Electronics in 2012 (NPE 2012), which provided a road map for the development
of electronics sector in the country. The Policy is holistic, investor-friendly and
market-driven, and focused on upgradation of infrastructure, providing incentives
to offset disabilities, promoting innovation and human resource development.
Schemes such as Modified Special Incentive Package Scheme (M-SIPS) to provide
financial incentives across the ESDM value chain to compensate for cost disability
in manufacturing; Electronics Manufacturing Clusters (EMC) for providing world-
class infrastructure and logistics; mandating safety standards; rationalization of
tariff structure and providing preference to domestically manufactured electronic
products in Government procurement under the aegis of the Public Procurement
Order 2017, are under implementation. As a result, ESDM industry has witnessed
significant upward growth in India and has the potential to become a vehicle of

economic growth and development.

The Modified Special Incentive Package scheme (M-SIPS), launched in 2012,
provides capital subsidy of 25% for electronics industry located in non-SEZ areas
and 20% for those in SEZ areas. Under M-SIPS, 419 investment proposals
involving investment of INR 1,13,089 crore have been received till 31.12.2018.
Out of these 419 applications, 197 applications with proposed investment of

approximately INR 41,791 crore have been approved; 19 applications with

Page 2 of 21


1.5.

proposed investment of approximately INR 14,764 crore have been recommended
by the Appraisal Committee for approval and 203 applications with proposed
investment of INR 56,534 crore are under appraisal. Out of 197 units which have
been approved, 134 units have commenced commercial production. Total capital
investment reported by these companies is INR 9,961 crore. These 134 units have
reported total sales of INR 74,921 crore, out of which goods worth INR 16,418
crore have been exported. The revenue paid to the Government on production by
these units is INR 9,020 crore. As per Quarterly Progress Reports received from
approved applicants, employment generated by these units so far is 66,555 (direct

and indirect).

The Electronics Manufacturing Clusters (EMC) Scheme, also launched in 2012,
encouraged entities, including State Government entities, to provide good quality
infrastructure within a cluster. Under the scheme, 50% of the project cost for
Greenfield EMC and 75% for Brownfield EMC is given as grant. So far, 20
Greenfield EMCs and 3 Brownfield EMC projects have been sanctioned with the
project outlay of INR 3,898 crore, including INR 1,577 crore from the Government
of India as Grant-in-aid. Under this scheme, 3,565 acres of land is being developed
in Electronics Manufacturing Clusters with likely investment of about INR 54,836

crore by the manufacturers.

In order to promote startups and innovation, a scheme called Electronics
Development Fund (EDF) was launched. EDF is a Fund of Funds which invests in
Venture Funds, which in turn invests in ventures/ Startups in the area of
Electronics, Nano-electronics and IT. At least 50% of the corpus has to be invested
in Ventures working in ESDM sector. EDF will be investing in 13 Daughter Funds.
The total targeted corpus of these 13 Daughter Funds is INR 6,950 crore and the
amount committed by EDF to these 13 Daughter Funds is INR 857 crore.

The global electronics production is estimated to be USD 2 trillion (approximately
INR. 1,30,00,000 crore) in 2017. Indian electronics hardware production has
increased from INR 1,900,366 crore in 2014-15 to INR 3,87,525 crore
(approximately USD 59 billion) in 2017-18, registering a Compound Annual
Growth Rate (CAGR) of 26.7%, as against a growth rate of 5.5% in 2014-15.

Page 3 of 21



Page 4 of 2]


1.7.

their parts/ components have been set up in the country during the last 3-4 years,

resulting in estimated employment for about 6.7 lakh persons (direct and indirect).

Implementation of the Schemes/ Programmes under the aegis of NPE 2012 has
successfully consolidated the foundations for a competitive Indian ESDM value
chain. The Government now seeks to build on that foundation to propel the growth
of ESDM industry in the country. The NPE 2019, prepared after extensive
stakeholder consultation, including the industry, industry bodies, key Ministries/
Departments of Government of India and State Governments, is conceived for this

purpose.

2. VISION

To position India as a global hub for Electronics System Design and Manufacturing

(ESDM) by encouraging and driving capabilities in the country for developing core

components, including chipsets, and creating an enabling environment for the industry to

compete globally.

3. MISSION

3.1.

3.2.

Promote domestic manufacturing in the entire value-chain of ESDM, including
core components and materials to increase the domestic value addition and reduce
dependence on import of electronic goods by focusing on skill, technology, scale

and the global market.

Strengthen India’s linkages with global trade, integrate with global value chains
and build facilitative programmes and incentive framework to boost Indian ESDM

exports.

3.2.1. Transform India into a destination for manufacturing and exports in pre-
identified, high growth electronics sector by encouraging and incentivizing

large ESDM eco-system to achieve net positive Balance of Payments.

Page 5 of 21


3.3.

3.4.

3.5.

3.6.

3.7.

3.8.

Develop capacities for manufacture in all sub-sectors of electronics, including
semiconductor facilities and display fabrication facilities, and create a vibrant and

dynamic fabless chip design eco-system in the country.

Build a risk-management eco-system to promote and create a framework for a
comprehensive start-up eco-system with focus on development of products, key

components and technologies, based on emerging technological landscapes.

Promote ease of manufacturing by introducing new/ innovative fiscal incentives
and augmenting the existing ones for the ESDM industry to make electronics

manufacturing in India globally competitive.

Ensure effective measures for protection to the domestic ESDM industry from

dumping of electronics goods.

Promote R&D to develop electronic products, including associated design and

creation of Intellectual Properties, for the domestic as well as global markets.

Incentivize and facilitate establishment of global bases for manufacturing of

components and sub-assemblies in India.

OBJECTIVES

4.1.

4.2.

4.3.

Promote domestic manufacturing and export in the entire value-chain of ESDM for

economic development to achieve a turnover of USD 400 billion (approximately
INR 26,00,000 crore) by 2025. This will include targeted production of 1.0 billion
(100 crore) mobile handsets by 2025, valued at USD 190 billion (approximately
INR 13,00,000 crore), including 600 million (60 crore) mobile handsets valued at
USD 110 billion (approximately INR 7,00,000 crore) for export.

Improve ease-of-doing Business for the ESDM industry.

Encourage industry-led R&D and innovation in all sub-sectors of electronics.

Page 6 of 21


44.

4.5.

4.6.

4.7.

4.8.

4.9,

4.10.

4.11.

Promote and create a framework for comprehensive Start-up eco-system in
emerging technology areas such as 5G, IoT, Artificial Intelligence, Machine
Learning, Drones, Robotics, Additive Manufacturing, Photonics, Nano-based
devices etc., and their applications in areas such as defence, agriculture, health,
cyber security, smart cities and automation, with special focus on solving real-life

problems.

Provide incentives and support for significantly enhancing availability of skilled

manpower, including re-skilling, in the ESDM sector.

Provide fiscal incentives and support for export-led growth, including significantly

enhancing economies of scale in electronics manufacturing.

Develop core competencies in all the sub-sectors of electronics, including inter-
alia electronic © components,  sub-assemblies and = semiconductors,
telecommunication and broadcasting equipment, IT hardware, medical electronics,
defence and strategic electronics, automotive electronics, industrial electronics,

consumer electronics, etc., and fabless chip design.

Become a global leader in the Electronics Manufacturing Services (EMS) segment
by promoting progressively higher value addition in manufacturing of electronic

products.

Provide policy support and special package of incentives for highly capital

intensive projects.

Drive indigenization in the microchips used by strategic and critical infrastructure
sectors viz., defence, space, atomic Energy, telecommunications, broadcasting,

aviation, power, etc., through design and production of such microchips.

Create specialized governance structures within the Government to cater to specific
needs of the ESDM sector, in view of fast changes in technology and business

models.

Page 7 of 21


4.12.

4.13.

4.14.

4.15,

Facilitate loans to the industry at competitive rates for setting up or expansion of

electronics manufacturing units.

Promote research, innovation and support to the industry in the areas of packaging,
interconnects and micro photonics, as a long term measure to counter the problems

posed by the continued use of Silicon, like the limit of scaling and dark Silicon.

Encourage and incentivize Transfer of Technology (ToT) for core technologies.

Promote research, innovation and support to industry for green processes and
sustainable e-Waste management, including inter-alia facilitation of citizen
engagement programmes for safe disposal of e-Waste in an environment friendly
manner, development of e-Waste recycling industry and adoption of best practices

in e- Waste management.

STRATEGY

Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY) will coordinate with the

concerned Ministries/ Departments to provide support to industry for rapid and robust

expansion of electronics hardware manufacturing within the country. MeitY shall work

out details and facilitate decisions by the Government on the measures indicated

hereunder:

Creating eco-system for globally competitive ESDM sector

5.1.

Create eco-system for globally competitive ESDM sector by incentivizing

domestic manufacturing and exports to compensate for disabilities:

5.1.1. Encourage domestic manufacturing of electronic products and their inputs
(parts, sub-assemblies and components) for significantly increasing value
addition by building a comprehensive ecosystem, covering the entire supply
chain, through suitable incentive mechanisms and fiscal interventions,

including phased manufacturing programmes, and removal of anomalies.

Page 8 of 21


5.1.3.

5.1.6.

5.1.9.

.2. Devise suitable methods for promotion of manufacturing of electronic

goods covered under the Information Technology Agreement (ITA-1) of
WTO.

Provide suitable tax benefits for the ESDM sector.

. Formulate suitable schemes and incentive mechanisms to encourage new

units and expansion of existing units in electronics manufacturing sector.

. Exploring the possibility of leveraging Defence Offsets, in consultation

with the Department of Defence Production (DDP), for development of

electronic components manufacturing.

Provide support for infrastructure development through formulation of a
new scheme or suitable modifications in the existing Electronics
Manufacturing Clusters (EMC) scheme, for supporting both Greenfield and
Brownfield manufacturing clusters. This shall include leveraging the
existing/ upcoming industrial clusters/ manufacturing zones/ corridors in
the country, with provision for ready-built factories, for attracting

investment in complete value chain of identified verticals.

. Exempt the import duty on identified capital equipment, not being

manufactured in the country, to reduce capital expenditure for setting up of

new units/ expansion of existing electronics manufacturing units.

.8. Promote a forward looking and stable tax regime, including advance

intimation to the industry to plan their investments in the form of Phased
Manufacturing Programme (PMP) in various segments of electronics, with

a sunset clause.

Develop manufacturing capacities for high performance computing.

5.1.10. Provide support for Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME) in

ESDM sector.

Page 9 of 21


5.1.11. Promote domestic capital goods industry for manufacture of capital goods

for electronics industry.

5.1.12. Provide suitable mechanism to generate resources for promotion of certain
critical sub-sectors of electronics manufacturing such as semiconductor

facilities and display fabrication units.

5.1.13. Provide a framework for supplying electronic units/ systems for National

Critical Infrastructure from domestic industry with indigenous technology.

Developing and Mandating Standards

5.2.

5.3.

5.4.

5.5.

Set up and promote standards development framework for developing standards,
based on global benchmarks, for electronics (including components as well as

fabless industry), IT, e-Governance, etc.

Promote and support contributions and participation of domain experts from
Government, academia, start-ups and industry in national and global standards

forums.

Set up an institutional mechanism within MeitY for mandating compliance to

standards for electronics products.

Create/ upgrade lab infrastructure/ capacity for testing of electronic goods,

including cyber security.

Ease-of-doing-Business

5.6. Strengthen and leverage Invest India, the National Investment Promotion and

Facilitation Agency, which was established as a single window for global
investors, for facilitation of investment in ESDM sector as a one-stop shop for
facilitation of investments / businesses, coordination with the State Governments,
establishment of joint ventures, obtaining speedy approvals by coordinating with
the concerned Government agencies on behalf of the investors, and hand-holding

them till the units become functional.

Page 10 of 21


Industry-led R&D and Innovation

5.7. Encourage industry-led R&D and innovation in all sub-sectors of electronics:

5.7.1.

3.7.2.

5.7.3.

5.7.4.

3.7.5.

Promote path-breaking research, grass root level innovations and early
stage Start-ups in emerging technology areas such as 5G, IoT/ Sensors,
Artificial Intelligence (AI), Machine Learning, Augmented Reality (AR)
and Virtual Reality (VR), Drones, Robotics, Additive Manufacturing,
Gaming and Entertainment, Photonics, Nano-based devices, as well as
thrust areas such as medical electronics, defence and strategic electronics,
automotive electronics, cyber security, power electronics and automation,
having major economic potential, with a special focus on applying the
outcomes, including frugal solutions, to solve real-life problems. Towards
this, in addition to premier institutes like IITs, NITs, IITs, and Central
Universities, the institutes in small cities shall also be encouraged. Chairs in
premier institutions will be established for focused research in the aforesaid

emerging technology areas and thrust areas of electronics.

Provide support for setting up of Incubation Centres/ Centres of Excellence
(CoE) and strengthening/ re-orienting the focus areas of the existing centres
to suit the current and future research requirements in the aforesaid

emerging technology areas and thrust areas of electronics.

Provide support for start-ups in these emerging areas/ technologies, from
supporting the concept to development/ prototyping of products, including

the complete value chain.

Formulate joint strategy and action plan along with industry, academia and
R&D organizations to identify core technologies and develop, acquire/ pool

Core and Peripheral IPs, and make them available to the industry.

Create Sovereign Patent Fund (SPF) to promote the development and

acquisition of IPs in ESDM sector.

Page 11 of 21


5.8.

5.7.6. Provide support for generation of Intellectual Property (IP) and Patents,

5.7.7.

5.7.8.

5.7.9.

including through outsourced R&D.

Set up framework for creation of an ecosystem for promoting design and IP

in the country.

Facilitate interaction between academia (including Atal Tinkering
Laboratories (ATLs) in schools across India, which aim to foster curiosity,
creativity and imagination in young minds; and inculcate skills such as
design mindset, computational thinking, adaptive learning, physical
computing, etc.) and industry to create and share IPs/ prototypes resulting
from R&D programmes. An agency to provide linkage between academia/
research institutes and industry shall be identified. After reviewing its

progress, more such agencies would be set-up at regional levels.

Set up a framework for incorporating principles of sustainability and
environmentally sound management of electronic goods throughout their
life cycle, across all sub-sectors of electronics, from the design, production

to end-of-life disposal.

Academia and freelancer-led R&D and innovation: Creation of facilities to house

best-in-class fabrication, testing and analysis equipment, accessible to students,

freelancers and academicians to build, test and improve their prototypes.

Human Resource Development

5.9.

Provide support for significantly enhancing the availability of skilled manpower in
the ESDM sector:

3.9.1.

Strengthening/ leveraging the existing manufacturing, research, design and
development hubs for promoting design and innovation in the field of

electronics.

Page 12 of 21


5.9.2. Work closely with Government, industry, academia, universities and other
institutions of learning and to design programmes to ensure availability of

adequate skilled manpower to the industry.

5.9.3. Provide support for skill development for emerging technology areas such
as 5G, IoT/ Sensors, Artificial Intelligence (AI), Machine Learning,
Augmented Reality (AR) and Virtual Reality (VR), Drones, Robotics,
Additive Manufacturing, Gaming and Entertainment, Photonics, Nano-
based devices, as well as for thrust areas such as medical electronics,
defence and strategic electronics, automotive electronics, cyber security,

power electronics and automation at the faculty and student levels.

5.9.4. Generate skilled manpower/ research base at Post Graduate/ Ph.D. level to
work in emerging technology areas by devising a suitable scheme to

support innovation in aforesaid emerging technology areas.

5.9.5. Provide support to Indian Ph.D. and Post-Doctoral scholars for carrying out
their research work through deputation to foreign institutions for a period of
upto 2 years with a provision for holding Joint IPR(s), if the research is
undertaken jointly with the foreign institution(s), subject to the condition

that they will serve in India for next 5 years.

5.9.6. Formulate schemes in partnership with the Ministry of Human Resource
Development, State Governments, National Skill Development Corporation
(NSDC), Electronics and Telecom Sector Skill Councils, National Institute
of Electronics and Information Technology (NIELIT), Premier Institutes,
etc., targeted specifically at job creation and bridging the skill gap to

provide skilled manpower to the industry.
Export Promotion

5.10. Provide attractive package of incentives for promoting export of electronics goods,

thereby empowering the exporters by facilitating global market access.

Page 13 of 21


Trusted Electronics Value Chain

5.11. Promote trusted electronics value chain initiatives to improve national cyber
security profile and control its supply chain across national defence (military,
intelligence, space) and critical national infrastructure (energy grids,
communication networks, digital economy, etc.).

Cyber Security

5.12. Enhance understanding of cyber security issues/ concerns, risks and mitigation
measures thereof pertaining to electronic products.

5.13. Encourage development of adequate capacities for testing.

5.14. Encourage use of IT products tested and evaluated for security, based on standards
like Common Criteria/ ISO 15408.

5.15. Promote the use of secure chips to reduce cyber security risks.

5.16. Promote start-up eco-system for development of photonics, nano-based devices

and cyber security products.

Promotion of Electronic Components Manufacturing Ecosystem

5.17.

Provide incentives and support for manufacturing of core electronic components
(both active and passive, including bare PCBs, PCB laminates, chip components,
connectors, wound components, switches, relays, ferrites, etc.), lithium-ion cells
(and such other cells that may be commercialized in future with advancement of
technology) for electronics/ EV applications, fuel cells, preform of silica, optical
fibre, solar cells, raw materials for electronic components, etc., and ATMP of

semiconductors.

Page 14 of 21


Mega Projects

5.18. Provide special package of incentives for mega projects which are extremely high-
tech and entail huge investments, such as semiconductor facilities (including
trusted foundries), display fabrication, photonics and LED chip fabrication units,

including according infrastructure status to these units.

5.19. Promote investment in mega facilities abroad, such as an existing semiconductor
facility, including support for setting up of R&D units abroad, where an eco-

system exists for a particular technology.
Preferential Market Access

5.20. Encourage the State Governments to adopt the Public Procurement (Preference to
Make in India) Order 2017 (PPO 2017), in procurement of electronic, including

cyber security products.

5.21. Leverage Government e-Market Place (GeM) to create/ expand the market for

domestically manufactured electronic products.

Developing core competencies in the sub-sectors of Electronics

5.22. Provide special support for developing core competencies in the following sub-

sectors:
5.22.1. Promotion of Fabless Chip Design Industry

5.22.1.1. Enable a multi-fold growth of Indian fabless chip design
industry by providing requisite support in form of Electronic
Design Automation (EDA) tools and FAB support for early-

stage startups.

5.22.1.2. Emulation/ rapid prototyping infrastructure at certain
locations that is accessible to all fabless start-ups in the

country.

Page 15 of 21


9.22.1.3.

5.22.1.4.

9.22.1.5.

5.22.1.6.

Provide support under the PPO 2017 to indigenously
designed integrated circuits, Module-on-Chips, System-on-
Chips, semiconductor IP licenses, all associated systems and
application software products including software IP licenses,

where IP is resident in India.

Provide support for Indian fabless industry through Venture
Capital (VC) funding and through positive market
intervention, driven through a dedicated nodal agency,
including establishing “India Fabless Semiconductor Venture
Fund” to directly invest in early-stage seed capital and
venture equity capital exclusively in Indian fabless
semiconductor companies with special focus on companies

creating indigenous semiconductor-centric IPs.

Set up Incubation Centres/ Centres of Excellence (CoEs) in
the country which shall provide necessary EDA tools, IPs,
prototypes and ATMP facilities required for start-ups.

Broaden the VLSI Design base in the country by including
larger number of colleges and institutions with close industry

interaction/ participation.

5.22.1.7. Provide export incentives for fabless chip design companies.

5.22.2, Promotion of Medical Electronic Devices Industry

5.22.2.1.

5.22.2.2.

Promote R&D through PPP model with the funding support
from industry and Government with specific focus on critical

components/ sub-assemblies.

Support systems for commercialization of technologies
available with academic/ R&D institutions through exclusive/

non-exclusive mechanisms,

Page 16 of 21


5.22.3.

5.22.2.3. Create infrastructure for carrying out test, evaluation,
accreditation and compliance by setting up new laboratories
and upgrading the existing laboratories, including subsidized

access of these facilities to MSMEs.

5.22.2.4. Encourage industry to comply with Indian Standards (IS).

5.22.2.5. Set up common testing facilities in the existing

manufacturing hubs/ zones/ clusters.

5.22.2.6. Provide support for start-ups through common manufacturing

facilities, open labs programme, etc.

5.22.2.7.. Provide support for manufacturing of specific critical
components/ sub-modules for medical electronics devices
such as Magnets, RF amplifiers, scintillators, X-ray and
computed tomography (CT) tubes, medical lasers, detectors,

etc.

5.22.2.8. Provide support for skill development/ enhancement of the
manpower required for the industry, including international
harmonization efforts for practice of skills in medical

electronics.
5.22.2.9. Institute a Phased Manufacturing Programme (PMP) for

medical electronic devices.

Promotion of Automotive Electronics Industry and Power

Electronics for Mobility

5.22.3.1. Provide support for R&D and concept-to-market innovation

for next generation solid-state batteries and power electronics

Page 17 of 21


5.22.4.

5.22.3.2.

5.22.3.3.

5.22.3.4.

93.22.3.5.

for electric vehicles (EVs), intelligent transportation systems,

drones, personal safety devices/ systems and automation.

Focus on IP creation in India at sub-system level by providing

financial support to start-ups.

Set up a Centre of Excellence (CoE) in open engineered

controls, electronics and software (CES) for EVs.

Promote exports through ‘Make-in-India’ branding
programme, marketing incentives and country specific

initiatives and export incentives.

Institute a Phased Manufacturing Programme (PMP) for

automotive electronic products.

Promotion of Strategic Electronics Industry

5.22.4.1.

5.22.4.2.

5.22.4.3.

Promote capacities for domestic sourcing of electronic goods/
systems in strategic and core infrastructure sectors, viz.,
defence, atomic energy, space, railways, power,

telecommunications, etc.

Create long-term partnerships between domestic ESDM
industries and the strategic sectors for domestic sourcing of

electronic goods/ systems.

Set up individual core teams for being imparted training and
subsequent transfer of technology (ToT) on core technologies
[antenna design, signal processing card design,
electromagnetic interference (EMI)/ electromagnetic
compatibility (EMC) proofing, etc.], which are repetitively

used to design solutions for the strategic electronics sector.

Page 18 of 21


Promotion of Electronics Manufacturing Services (EMS) Industry

5.23. Promote the following key activities under EMS, for creation of the requisite

component manufacturing eco-system in the country:

5.23.1. Engineering and design of PCBs.

5.23.2. PCB assembly, including sub-assemblies.

5.23.3. Functional testing.

5.23.4. Maintenance services such as warranty and repair services, etc.

5.23.5. Product and component design

Promotion of Assembly, Testing, Marking and Packaging (ATMP) Industry

5.24. Providing policy support for Assembly, Testing, Marking and Packaging (ATMP)

lines for select semiconductor ICs, including memory chips, on security grounds.

Other Measures

5.25. Promote Eco-park in each State for processing of e-Waste in environment friendly

manner in PPP mode to integrate formal and informal operators.

5.26. Facilitate warehousing of components and raw materials to reduce the lead time
and make them available just-in-time for electronics manufacturing/ fabless chip

design units, including start-ups.

5.27. Source, stockpile and promote exploration and mining or acquiring mines of rare
earth metals in foreign countries/ continents (such as in Africa and Australia)

required for electronics manufacturing.

5.28. MeitY shall formulate and implement appropriate schemes for promotion of

electronics hardware manufacturing, as required from time to time.

Page 19 of 21


5.29. Develop an index for indicating status and growth of electronics manufacturing

industry in the States and bring out a periodic report indicating ranking of States.

5.30. Develop a mechanism for national-level market research reports on performance,
impact assessment of policy interventions for their continuation and/ or mid-
course correction, trends, emerging areas, etc., on a periodic basis, including

models for successful innovation for all sub-sectors of electronics.

6. State Support

6.1 Encourage and support the States to play a proactive role in promotion of
electronics manufacturing by providing conducive environment to promote

investments.

7. Governance Structure

7.1. Create institutional mechanism for implementation of various schemes/
programmes under the Policy to review the implementation status and provide

strategic recommendations/ decisions from time to time.
8. Power to Amend the Policy

8.1. Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing paras, MeitY with the
approval of competent authority, may review and amend various aspects of this
Policy from time to time, depending upon the experience gained during

implementation, market dynamics, feedback from stakeholders, etc.

oe \3
(Sanjay Kumar Ratton
Joint Secretary to Government of India
Telephone: 24363071
New Delhi, Dated: 25" February, 2019

To
The Manager
Government of India Press - along with Hindi version

Mayapuri, New Delhi.

Page 20 of 21


Copy to:

PYN

Am

All concerned Ministries / Departments of Government of India

Cabinet Secretariat

PMO

NITI Aayog

Comptroller and Auditor General of India

AS&FA, Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology

Internal Distribution
(Sanjay Kimar Rakesh)

Joint Secretary to Government of India
Telephone: 24363071

Page 21 of 21


