‘ =
_

nawonall. .

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA

-



Department of Family Welfare
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
Government of India
Nirman Bhawan
New Delhi - 110011

Website : http. ffmohiwonicin



a ener

A. Introduction

B. Objectives

C. Strategic Themes

0, Leglelatian

E, Publle Support

FE Wew Structures

G. Funding

H. Promotional and Hotivational Measures
for Adoption of the Small Family Norm

I, Conchusian

List of Appendices

Appendix I
Operational Strategias

Append» If
Milestones

Appendix ITT
Pemographic Profile

Appendix IV
Unmet Needs

1s

15

15

16

iy

19

20

36

a ta

44


List of Tables

I. Population Prajectians for India {million}

2. Anticipated Growth In Population f{rilllion)

3. Projection of Crude Birth Rate, Infant Mortalibe Rate

and TFR, If the MPP 2000 is fully implemented

4. Age Compoistion as Percentage of
the Total Population

5S. Populathon Profile af @ States and Union Territories
of Indla with TFR less than or equal ta 2.1

&, Population Profile of 11 States and Union Territories
of India with TRR22.1 but <3

7. Population Profle of 12 States and Union berritories
of India with TER greater than or equal te 3

&. Maternal Martality Ratios in Asia

9. [nter-State Olfferences within Indig in
Maternal Mortallty Ratlos

10. Infant Mortality Rates in Asia

List af Boxes
1. India’s Demographic Achi@veament

2. National Socto-Demographic Goals for 2010

38

43

44

40

41

#1

41


1,

The overriding objective of ceonemic and sacial development is to
improve the quality of tives chat people lead, to enhance chele well-
being, and to provide them with opportunities and choices to become
productive assets iin socdety.

In 1952, Indla was the first country In the werld to launch a national
programme, emphasizing family planning to the extent necessary for
reducing birth rates “bo sbabilize the population at a level consistent
with the requirement of national economy™ . After 1952, sharp
declines in death rates were, however, nok accompanied by a similar
drop in Girth rabes. The Natonal Health Policy, 1985 stated chat
replacement levels of total fertiliby rete" (TFR) should te achieved by
the year 2000,

On Ll May, 2000 India Is projected to have 1 billion 3 (200 crore}
people, Le. 76 percent of che ward's population on 2.4 percent of the
globe's land area. Wf current trends continue, India may overtake
China in 2045, te become the most populous country In the wadd,
While clabal population has Increased threefold during this century,
frora 2 billion te 6 billion, bac population of India has increased nearly
five thmes from 238 million {23 crores) te 1 billion In the same period,
Tndla's current annual [rerease in populdtian oF 25.5 million is large
enough to neutralize efforts bo conserve the resource endowment and
enviraniment,

Ralf a century after formulating the natlanal farcily welfare praqrarncae,
India has:

reduced crude birth rate (CBR) from 40.8 (L951) to 26.4 (1998,
SRS};

halved the infant mortality rabe (IMP) from 146 per 1000 Ive births
(1951) te 72 per LODE live births (1998, SRS);

quadrupled the couple protection rate (CPR from 10.4 percent
£1979) te44 portent £1599];

reduced crude death rate (CDR) fram 25 (1952) te 9.0 (1998, SRS};
added 25 years to life expectancy from a7 years to G2 years:

achteved neany universal awareness of che néed fer and methods of
familly planning, and

reduced total fertility rate fram 6.0 (1951) to 3.3 (1997, SRS}.



4. Indla's population in 1991 and projections to 2016 sre as follows:

ebte 1: Fopulstion Peejections far Inia (radlian)'

March 1992 March 2004 March 2011 March 2016
46.4 1912.4 1174.9 1263.5

Stabilisiig population is an essential requirement for promating
sustiinable development wilh more equitable distribution, However,
[tis a8 much & function of making reproductive health care accessible
and affordable for all, as of increasing the provision and outreach of
primary and secondary educatlon, extending basic amenitles
including sanitation, safe drinking water and housing, besides
anipowering women and enhancing thelr employment opportunities,
and providing transport and cornmiinications.

6& The National Population Policy, 2000 {NPP 2000) affirms the
fammitment of gevemment bowards voluntary and informed choice
6nd consent of citizens while availing of reproductive health care
services, and continuation of the target free appraach In
administering family planning services. The NPP 2000 provides a
policy framework for advancing goals and prioritizing strategies
during the next decade, to meet the reproductive and child health
needs of the people of India, and bo achleye net replacement levels
(TPR) by 2010. Itis based upon the need be simultaneously address
issues of child survival, matemal health, and contracepion, while
INecreasing qutreach and coverage of 4 comprehensive package of
reproductive and chlld heath services by goverment, Industry and
the velunbary non-government sechor, working in partnership.

7, The immediate abjecttve of the NPP 2000 is to address the unmet
needs for contraception, health care infrastructure, ond health
personnel, and bo provide Integrated service dellvery For basic
reproducthé ard chlld health care. The medium-term objective is to
bring the TRR to replacement fevels by 2010, through vigorous
Implementation of later-sectoral operadonal strategies. The Iong-
term objective is to achieve a stable population by 2045, at a leval
consistent with the requirements of sustalnable economic growth,
social development, and envirgnmental protection.

2 Mifes toner un the Bvalition ar oe Pasian Policy are istoo' of Apgeratin i, gage I6-a7
2 TPR! Aveage tumber of ovo oar te a iit deity der edie.
4 Ssume: Techaleal GA ot Appiihion Arovechions, Flonning Ganrurlssity,

hs



B. In pursuance of these objectives, the following National Socio-
Bemographic Goals te be achieved in each case by 2010 are formulated:

Address the unmet néeds for basic reproductive and chitd health
services, Supplies and infrastructure,

Make sehool education up to age 14 free and compulsory, and reduce
drop outs at primary and secondary school levels to below 20 percent
for both bays and gids.

Reduce infant mortality rate to below 30 per 1000 lve births.
Reduce matemal mortality ratio te below 100 per 100,000 live births.

Achieve universal Imenunization of children agalnst all vaccine
preventable diseases,

Promote delayed marriage for girls, nok éarli¢r than age 28 and
preferably after 20 years of age,

Achieve &0 percent institutional deliveries and 100 percent dellvesics
by trained persons.

Achitve universal access ta Information feounseling, and services for
fartitity regulation and eonbeaception with a wide basket of choices,

Achleve 100 per cent registration of births, deaths, marriage and
pregnancy.

Contain the spread af Acquired immunadefictency Syndrome {Alb},
and promote gresber integration bebween the management of
reproductive tract Infectlons ¢{RTI} and sexually transmitted
Infectlons (S71) and tha Mational AIDS Control Organisation.

Prevent and central communicable diseases,

lategrate Indian Systems of Medicine (15M) in the provision of
reproductive and child heallh services, and In reaching at ta
howsenolds,

Promobe vigorously the small family norm to achieve replacement
levels of TER.

Bring about convergence in implementation of related social secbor
programs so that family welfare becames a people centred
programme.



oad

_w
|

Tf the NPP 2000 is fully Implemented, we anticipate o population af
1107 million (110 crores) in 2010, instead of 1142 ralillon (115
cranes) projected by the Technoleal Group on Population Projections:

Tobla 2: Anticipated Growth ia Pepulstion (millicn)

Year Tfcurrentircnds continue | IF TFR 2.1 is acheved by 2010
Torta! Tnoreaseln Total Tadreésse in
Population | population population POpolabl on

1994 846.3 - B4G.3 -

1986 934.2 17.6 534.2 17.6
1947 048.4 15.7 949.0 14.8
2000 996.9 15.7 | S1.0 14.0
2002 1027.6 15.4 1043.0 11.0
2010 1162.3 16.8 | 1107.0 11,75

Similarly, the anticipated reductions inthe birth, infant rartality and
total Fertility rates ara:

Tutls 2: Peejoctions cf J2 Cith Rats, Infont flertcrhiy Rote,

ond TEA, if the f: COD is fully irmaptionicnted.
Crude alrth Rate «Infant Mortality Rate | Total Fortillty Rats
2iuz 7.2

25.4 3.3
23.0 26
21.0 fl

a.

Population groeth in India continues to be high on account of :

a The large size oF the population in the reproductlye age-group
festimated contribution 38 percent), An addition of 417.2 million
behyvesn 1991 and 2016 is anticlpated despite substantial
reductions In family size In several states, induding those which
have already achieved replacement levels of TPR. This
momentum of Increase in population will continue for some more
years because high TRS in the past have resulted In a large
proportion of the population being curreskly in their reproductive
Years, ICS Impcrative that the the reproducthye age qravp adopts
without Further delay or exception the “small family norm”, for
the reason that about 45 percent of population increase is
contribubed by births above twa chitdren per family,


me Higher fertility duc to unmet need for contraception (estimated
eontribution 20 percent), India has 166 millon eligible couples,
of which just 44 percent are currenth: cffectively protected.
Ungent steps are currently required to make contraception more
widely avallable, accessible, and affordable. Around 74 percent
of the population Ives In rural areas, in about §,5 lakh villages,
many WICH poor communications and transport. Reproductive
heali and basic health linfrastructure and services often do nok
reach the villages, and, accordingly, vast numbers of people
canriek avail oF these servlees,

@ Aigh wanted fertility due to the high Infant mortality mabe fIMr)
festlnated contribution about 20 percent). Repeated child births
are seen as an Iméurarice against muthiple infant (and child}
deaths and accordingly, Algh Infant rnertality stymles all efferts
@t reducing TFR.

e Over 50 percent of girls marry below the age of 18, the minimum
legal age of mantage, resulting in a bypical repraductive potbern
of "boo early, too frequent, too many", Around 23 percent births
OGfWr &t intervals of less than 24 months, which also results in
high IMB.

The cauetry s dentographic profile ts aver ia Appendis [if (pages
38-42),

4

10, We identify 12 strategic themes which must be Simulbkaneously
pursued in "stand atone” or inter-sectoral programmes In order te
achieve the national soclo-demogm phic goals fer 2010,

These are presented below:

rere)

11. The 74rd and F4th Constitutional Amendments Act, 1992, made
health, Family welfare, and education a responsibility of village
panchayats. The panchayati raj instibutiens are an inmmportant means
af furthering decentralised planning and programme implemerntalian
in the context of the NPP 2000. However, ln order to realize thelr
Potential, Hey need strengthening by further delegation oF ;
administrative and financlal powers, including powers of resource 5
mighilizatlon .



_———---

Further, since 23 percent of elacted panchayat seats are reserved for
WOMEN, representative commitbees of the panchayets (headed by an
elected woman panchayat member) should be formed bo promote a
gender sensitive, multi-sectoral agenda for population stabliisation,
that will “think, plan 2nd act locally, and support nationally”. These
committees may identify arca-specific unmet needs for reproductive
health services, and prepare need-based, demandedrivtn, $ocit-
demographic plans at the village level, almed at identifying and
providing responsive, peaple-centred and integrmttd, basic
reproductive and chitd health care. Panchayats demonstrating
exemplary performance in the compulsory regisiratian of births,
deaths, marriages, and pregnancies, unlversallzing the small family
norm, Increasing sate deliveries, bringing about reductions in Infant
and matemal mortality, and promoting compulsory education up to
age 14, willbe nationally recognized and honarcd,

(ii) Convergence of Scrvica Delivery ot Village
Lovecls

12. Efforts at population stabilisation will be effectlye gnily lf we direct an
Integrated package af essential services at village and household
levels. Below district levels, current health infrastructure includes
2,500 cammunity health centres, 25,000 primar health centres
feach covering 4 papulation of 30,000}, and 1.36 lakh subcentres
feach covering a population of $000 in the plains and 3,000 In hilly
regions)". Inadequacies in the existing health infrastructure have led
to an onmet need of 28 percent for contraception services, and
abyvitus gaps In coverage and outreach. Health care centres are over-
burdened and struggle to provide senices wilh limited personnel and
equipment, Absence of supporthve supervision, lack of training in
inber-personal communication, and tack of mativation ta work In rural
areas, together Impede citizens! access to reproductive and child
health services, and comtribube bo peor quality of services and an

apparent Insensitlylty &o cllant's needs. The last SO years have
demonstrabed the unsuitability of these yardslicks for provision of
health care Infrastructure, particulandy far remote, inaccessible, or
Eparcely populabed regions in the country Ike hilly and forested
areas, desert raglgns and tribal areas. We need to promcte a mare
Aexible approach, by extending basie wearoductlye and ehlid health
care through mobile clinics and counseling services. Further,
recognizing what goverment alone cannot make up for the
Inadequacles in health care infrastructure and services, in order la
reselve unmel néeds and extend coverage, the Involvement af the
valuntary sector and the non-govemiment sector in partnership with
6 | the government is essential.

1 7 Source: SOF Stacesics, FOO,



id.

fo

Since the management, funding, and laplementation of health and
education programmes has been décenbalised ta panchayats, lin
order to reach Household levels, a one-stop, integrated and
coordinated service delivery should be provided at village levels, far
basic reproductive and child health seniges, 4 vast ineresse in the
number of trained Girth attendants, at least two per village, Is
neecssary bo universalise coverage and outreach ef ante-natal, notal
and post-natal health care. An equipped maternity fut In each village
should be set up to serve as a dellvery room, wilh functioning
midwifery kits, basic medication for essential obstetric aid, and
Indigenous medicines and supplies for maternal and new born care, 4
key feature of the Integrated service delivery vill be the registration
at Village levels, af births, deaths, marriage, and pregnancies. Each
village should malntaln 2 tst af corirnunity midwives and tralned
birth attendants, village health guides, panchayat sewa sshayaks,
primary school teachers and aanganwadi werkers who may be
entrusted walh varaus responsibilities in the Implementation at
inbegrabed service dellvery,

14. The panchayats should seek the help of community opinian makers bo

15,

communicake the benefits of smaller, healthier families, the
significance of educating girls, and promoting female participation in
paid emplayment, They should also Involve civil society in monibaring
the availability, accessibility and affordability of servi¢es and
Eup Alles.

Cocmional strategies are desorbed in fhe Acton Pian at Appendix I
(pages 21-22}.

(ii) Cragawering Vloaicn fer Inprovcd Health ond
feutrition

The complex sociascultural determinants of women's health and
nutrition have qumulative effects over a lifetime. Dlscriminatory
childcare leads to malnutibon and Impalred physical development of
the gin child. Undernutritian and mitronubient deficiency In early
adelescence goes beyond mere food entitlements te those wutrition
related capabilities that become crucial ta 4 woman's well-being, and
trreugh hes, te che well-being of children. The positlve effects of gaod
health and nutrittan an the labour productivity oF the poor is well
documented, Te the extent that women are over-represented among
the poor, Interventions for Improving warmen's health and nubition
Sré crilital for Sowerby reductton.



16,

l?.

18,

13,

2,

Impalred health and nutrition ls compounded by carly childbearing,

and censequent risk of serous pregnancy related complications.

Wannen's risk oF premature death and disability is highest duving their
repreduclive years, Malnutrition, frequent pregnandes, unsate
abortions, RTI and STI, all combine ta keep the maternal mortality
ratio in India among the highest glabally.

MHatemal mortality is not merely a health disadvantage, tis 3a matter
of social injustite. Low social and economic status of gids and women
limits thelr access to education, good nutnbion, a well as money to
pay for health care and family planning servioes. The exbent of
Matemal mortality is an indicator of disparity and inequity tn access
bo appmpriate health care and nutrition services throughout &
lifetime, and particularly during pregnancy and chiid-blrgh, and ls 2
crucial factor contributing te high maternal mortality,

Programmes for Safe Motherhood, Universal Irraunisation, Child
Survival and Oral Rehydration have been combined into an
Integrated Reproductive and Child Health Programme, which also
indudes promcting management of STIs and ATs. Women's health
and nutrition problems Gin be largely prevented or mitigated through
(nny foS6 Interventions designed for low Income settings.

The voluntary non-government sector and the private corporate
sector should ectlvely collaborate with the community and
government through specific commitments In the areas af basic
reproductive and child health care, basic education, and in securing
higher levels of participation inthe paid work force for women.

Oncratieanal strategies aré described in fre Acton Plan af Appendix f
(pages 22-26),

Infant mortality is a sensitive Indicator of human development, High
mortality and morbidity among infants and children below 5 years
Occurs on aanounk of Inadequate care, asphyxia during birth,
premature birth, low birth weight, acute respiratory Infections,
diarrhoea, Vaccine preventable diseases, malnutrition and
deficiencies of nutrients, including Vitamin 4. Infant mortalley rabes
hawe not slanificantly dectingd in recent years.



21.

22,

23.

Our poonty ts to intensify neonatal care, 4 Matlonal Technical
Committes should be sek up, consisting principally of consultants ia
obstetics, pediatrics (neonatologists), family health, medical
research and statistles fram among academia, public healln
professionals, clinical practitioners and government. Ibs tenms of
reference $shewld Include prescribing perinatal sudit rar,
developing quality improvement activities with manitoring schedules
and suggestions for facliitating provision ef continuing medi¢al and
nursing education to all perinatal health care providers.
Implementation at the grass-roots must benefit from current
dey cloprmenks In the fickls oF pennatalogy and negnatolagy. The baby
Friendly hospital Initiatlyve (BFH!} should be extended to all hospitals
afd clinics, up to Subtenioe levels, Addibianally, besides promoting
breast-feeding and complementary feeds, the GFHI should include
Updating of skills of trained Birth atbendants bo improve new born care
practices bo reduce the mske of hypothermia and |nfectlan. Essential
equipment for the i born wus be provided ab subeénire levels,

Child survival interventions 1.6. universal immunisation, central of
childhood diarrhaeas with oral rehydration therapies, management of
acute respiratory Infections, and massive doses of Vilamin 4 and Food
supplements have all helped to reduce infant and child mortallty and
moorbidiby. With Intenslilad efforts, the eradication of palio is within
reach, However the decline in standards, outreach and quality of
routine Immunisation | & matter of concern. Significant
improvement need to be made in the qualiby and coverage of the
POUTINE immunisation programme,

Qoeratonal sirafegias area descrited In fhe Action Plan af Agnendiy F
(pages 26-27),
(vu) floods tio Unnict Mocrs for Faniuly Weoloro
forvices

In both rural and urban areas there continue to be unmek needs for
eoritraceptives, supplles and equiprrent for iategraked serviee
delivery, mabiliby of Health providers and patients, and
comprehensive information, Ik (5 Irpertant to strengthen, energise
and make accountable the cutting @dge of health infrastructure atthe
village, subcentre and primary health centre levels, Lo Improve
facilities for referral transportation, bo encourage and strengthen
focal Initlatives far ambulance services at village and block lewels, ta
increase innovative sedal marketing schemes for affordable products
and services and te improve advocacy In Jocally relevant and
acceptable dialects,

Operational strategies art descoged fa be Action Par iq Appendix f
(Pages 27-28),


Za.

24,

(wi) Uncer-Served Population Grouns

(2) Urban Slums

Nearly 100 million people live in urban slums, with litle or na aceess
to potable water, sanitation facliities, and health care services. This
contributes to high infant and child mortality, whieh in turn
perpetuate high TFR and maternal mortality. Basic and primary
health care, Including reproductive and child health care, needs to be
Provided, Coordination with mynilelpal bodies For water, sanitation
and waste disposal must be pursued, and targeted Information,
education and communication campalans must spread awareness
about the secondary and tertiary facilities available,

Gperational strategies are descobed tn the Action Flan in Apocadtx I
fpoges 28-29).

{bj Trlbal Communitics, Hil] Area Populations and Claplaced
dnd Migrant Populations

In general, populations in remote and low density areas do nat have
adequate access bo affordable health care services. Tribal populations
Often have Algh lewels of morbidity arising frem poor nutrition,
particularly in situations where (hey are involuntarily displaced or
resettled. Frequently, they have tow levels of literacy, coupled with
high infant, child, and matemal mortality, They remain under-served
In the coverage of reproductive and child health services, These
communities need special athentlon in terms of basic health, and
reproductive and child health services. The special needs of tribal
groups which need to be addressed Include the provision of mobile
dinics that will Be responsive to ceaconal variatlans In the availability
af wark and income. Infomation and counseling on infertility, and
regular supply of standardised medication will be Included.

Operational strategies are dascobed in thé Action Plan at Appendix: +

foage 23),

(2) Adalesecnts

26, Adolescents represent about a fifth of India’s population. The needs af
adolescents, Including protection from unwanbed pregnancies and
soxually transmitted diseases (STD), have not been specifically
addressed In Lhe past. Programmes should encourage delayed
mamage and child-bearing, and educatian of adolescents about the
risks OF unprotected sox, Reproductive health services for adolescent
girls and boys is especialty sigaificantin rural India, where adolescent

10



27,

20.

mamiage and pregnancy are widely prevalent, Thelr special
requirements comprise information, counseling, population
Bducation, and making contraceptlve services accessible and
affordable, providing food supplements and nutritianal services
through the ICS, and enforcing the Child Marrlage Restraint «Act,
1976.

Operational strategies are desorbed in the siction Plan in Appeadix I
(pages 24-30),

° ”

(C) Taicroi od Portiecatiica of ffonoin Ploancid

Inthe past, population prog remniies have tended te cxdude menfalk.
Gender inéqualifes in patriarchal sodeties ensure that man play a
ondical role In determining the education 4nd employment oF family
members, age at mamage, besides aocess to and utllisatlan of
health, nutrition, and familly welfare services far women aad children.
The achive invelvement of men is called for in planning familtes,
supporting contraceptive use, helping pregnant women slay healthy,
arranging skilled ¢are during delivery, avoiding delays in seeking
care, helping after the baby ls born and, finally, in belng 3 responsible
father In shert, the acliive cooperation and participation of men is
vital for ensuring programme acceptance, Further, currently, over o?
percent of sterilisations are bubectormies and this manifestation of
gender Imbalance needs bo be conected, The special needs of men
include re-popularising vascetornies, in partiqular no-scalpel
vasectomy a5 4 safe and elmple procedure, and facgysing on men In
the infowmation and education campaigns ta promote the small family
norm.

Operational strategies are descnbed in the Action Blan in Agpendic f
(page FO),

(vii) Diversoliooth Cora Proviceors

Given the large unmet need for reproductive and child health
services, and inadequacies In health care Infrastructure it is
imperative bo increase the numbers and diversify the categories of
health care providers. Ways of delng this include accrediting privake
medical practitioners and assigning them bo defined beneficiary
groups ta provide these services; revival cf the system af teensed
medical practitioner wha, after appropiate certification from the
Indian Medical Association (]hi4}, cavld provide specified clinical
Services,

Operational strategies ara descoded in the Action Plan af Anpendiy I
{pages 70-71},

11)

4


2g,

30,

31.

(wit) Coo cara d Wi cat Conieuta: aon aera:
feen-Govoranicn? Crgomcstions ond tio

Privatofcctrr

A natlonal effort to Peach out to houschalds tonnot be sustained by
government atone, We need to put In place a partnership of non-
Government voluntary organizations, the privabe corporate sector,
government and the community. Tiggered by rléing Incomes and
institutional finance, private healkh care has grown signifeantly, with
an impressive pool of expertise and management skills, and querrently
accounts for nearly 75 percent of health care expenditurcs. hovecwcr,
despite thelroabylous pobential, mobilising the private (profit and non-
profit) secbor to serve public health goals ralses governance issucs of
contractlng, @cereditatian, regulation, referral, Besides the
appropriate division of labaur behween the publle and private health
providers, all af whith need bo be addressed carefully. Where
government interventions or capagitles are Insufficient, and the
partielpation ef the private sector unviable, focused service delivery
by NGOs may effectively complement government effarts,

Operationa! strategies are described In fhe Actin Plan bt Ageendia I
foage 32).

(ies) Maoinsiresnunsg I Le as ek hl ret.

ecodhonicopatiry

India's tornrunity supported ancient but living treditlons of
indigenous systems of medicine has sustalacd the population For
Cenhuries, With Sfective cures and remedies far nymercys
conditions, Including those relating to women and children, vith
minimal side effects, Wulisotion of ISMH in basic reproductlhye and
child health care will expand the paol of effeckie health core
providers, oplimise utilisation of localby based remedies and cures,
and promote low-cost health care, Guidelines need to bo evolved to
regulate and ensure slandardisation, efficacy and safety of [SH
dag for wider entry inte natlenal markets.

Particular challenges Include providing appropriate kraining, and
ralsing awarences and skill development in reproductlve and child
health care to the instltutlonally qualified [SMA medical practitioners.
The feasibility of utilising their services to all in gaps In manpower at
village levels, and at subcentres and primary health centres may be
explored. ISMH Institutions, hospitals and dispensarles may be
utilised for reproductive and child health care programmes. At village
levels, the services of the ISMH "barefoot doctors", after appropriabe



33,

a3.

training, may be utilised for advocacy and counseling, fer distributing
supplles and equipment, and as depot holders, [SMH practices may
be applied at village maternity huts, and at househeld Ievels, for
ante-natel, hatal and post natal care, and for nurture of the new barn,

Onerational strategies are described ia the Action Aan in Appenaix |
{page 33),

GOYEMMent must conskantlh advance, encourage, and support
medical, social sciance, demographic and behaviaural sticnec
research on maternal, child and reproductive health care Issues, This
val improve medical techniques relevant toa the country's needs, and
Strengthen programme and praject design and implamentation.
Consultabion and frequent dialogue by Government with the existing
nehweork of academic and research instibutions in allapathy and ISMH,
Ond with other relevant public and povate research Institutions
engaged In soclal sctence, demography and behavioural research
musk eentinuc., The Intemational Institute of Population Sciences,
and the population research centres which have been sect up bo pursue
applied research in population relabed matters, need bo be revitallsed
and strengthened,

Appli¢d research relies upon constant monitoring of performance at
the programme and project levels, The Natianal Health and Family
Welfare Sunmey provides data on key health and family welfare
Indicators every flve years, Data from the first National Family Health
Survey (MNFHS-1), 1992-93, has been updated by NFHS-2, 1998-99,
to be published shortly. Annyal data is generated by the Sample
Registration Sumcoy, which, inber alia, maps at state levels the birth,
death and Infant mortality rites, Absence of regular feedback has
been & weakness in the family veelfare progamme. For this reasan,
the Gepartment of Family Welfare ls strengthening its rianagement
information systems (MIS) and has commenced during 1993, 2
system of ascertalning Impacts and outcomes through disbrict
surveys and facility surveys, The district surveys cover 50% districts
every Feds, sothat every 2 years there isan update on every district ia
the country, The facility surveys aetertain the availability of
infrastructure and Services op to primary health centre level,
eovernng one district per month. The feedback from both these
Suneys enable remedial action at disbictand sub-district levels.

Ooeratonal strategies are desorbed iq the Action Plat in Agoemoie 7
foaoes 23-341).



24.

35,

36,

Improved life expectancy Is [leading to an Increase in the absolute
nuraber and proportion of persons aged 60 years and above, and Is
anticipated te nearly double during 1996-2015, fram 62.3 million to
112.9 million? . When viewed in the context of significant weakening
of traditional support systems, the elderly are Increasingly
vulnerable, needing protection and care. Promoting old age health
care and support will, qvertime, alsa serve to reduce the incentive to
have lange Families.

The Ministry of Soclal Justice and Empowerment has adopted in
January 1999 a Mational Poli¢y on Cider Persons, It has became
Important te build in geriatric health concerns Im the poputation
molicy. Ways of dolng this include sensitsing, training and equipping
rural and urban health centres and hespitals for providing geriatric
health care: encouraging Nts to design and implement formal and
infommal schemes that make the eldedy economically self-reliant;
providing for and routinising screening for cancer, askeoporgsls, and
cardigvascular Goanditions In primary health centres, community
heath cantres, and urban health care centres at primary, secondary
and tertiary levels: and exploring tax Incentives to encourage grown-
upehidren to look after their aged parents.

Qoeratonal strategies are described in the Action Alan fa Appendix I
(rage 34),

(i) Informeiica, Caucctica, wadCcamuniccton

Information, education and communication (LEC) of familly welfare
messages must be clear, focused and disseminated everywhere,
Including the remote corners of the country, and in local dialects. This
will Ensure that the messages are cffectively conveyed, These necd to
be strengthened and thele outreach widened, with locatly relevant,
and locally comprehensible media and massages. On the model of the
total literacy campalgns which have successfully roobilised local
HopuUiatlons, there is need te undertake a massive national campalgn
on population related lssues, via artists, popular film stars, doctors,
valdyas, hakins, nurses, local raldvlves, women's organizations, and
youth anganizatloang.

Operational strategies are described Jn the Action Plan in Appendix f
(pages 34-35).

& Source: Tec grow on Posusbon Preyections, Planning Comimusson.



a.

2a,

45,

40,

Asa motivational measure, in order to enable state governments to
fearlessly and effectively pursue the agenda for population
stabllisation contained in the National Populatign Polley, 2000, one
legistation if cansidered necessary, [t ls recommended that the 42nd
Constibutlonal Amendment that reeses bill 2001, che number of seats
bo the Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha based or the 1971 Census be
extended up ta 2026,

Demonstration of strong support to the small family norm, a5 well as
personal example, by political, cormmuniby, business, prafesslonal
and religious leaders, media and film stars, sports personalities, and
opinion makers, will enhance its aceepkance throughout spelety, The
govemment will actively enlist their support In concrete ways,

The WEP 2000 Is ta be largely implemented and managed at
panchayal and Hadar palika levels, in coord nadon with ae concerned
Stabe/Union Territory administrations. Accordingly, the specific
situation In @ach state/UT must be kept in mind. This will require
comprehensive and multisectoral toerdination of planning and
Innplementation betwoon health and familly welfare on the ane hand,
along with schemes for education, nutrition, women and child
development, safe drinking water, sanitation, rural roads,
communications, transportation, housing, Forestry development,
enviranmental protection, aad urban development, Accordingly, the
following structures are recommended:

to -

tise. -- .

A National Commission on Population, presided ewer by the Prime
Minister, will have the Chief Ministers of all states and UTs, and the
Central Minisber in charge of the Departinent of Farmnily Welfare and
other concemed Central Minislsics and Departments, for example
Deparbnent of Woman and Child Gevelopment, Department of
Education, Cepartment ef Sacial Justice and Empowerment in the
Ministry of ARG, Ministry of Rural Development, Ministry of
Environment and Forest, and others a8 necessary, and reputed
demographers, public health professionals, and NWigds as mernbers,
This Commission will oversee and review implementation of policy.
The Commission Scerctariat will be provided by the Deparbnent of
Farmily Welfare.


16

41,

4z,

43.

44,

Each state and UT may consider having a State / UT Commission on
Population, presided over by the Chief Minister, an the analogy of the
National Commission, to likewise oversee and review implementation
oFbho MPP 2000 Inthe state J UT,

(1) Correia lia, pe ee al

The Alanning f¢mmisslen will have a Coordination Cell far fater-
sectoral coordination between Ministries for enhancing performance,
particularly In States {UTs needing spectal attention an account of
adverse demographic and human development Indicators.

(60) Tocicalosy ficcica fi) bie Boo re a

To enhance perfonmande, partiqularty in states with cunmently below
average sotio-demeographic indices that need focused attention, &
Technology Missian in the Departrient of Farlly Welfare will be
established to provide technology support in respect of design 4nd
monitoring oF projecks and programmes for repreduetive and child
tealth, as wall as for IEC campalgns.

The programmes, projects and schemes premlsed on the goals and
objecthves of the NPP 2006, and Indeed all efforts at population
stabilisation, will be adequately funded Im view of thelr crithcal
Importance to natlonal development. Preventive and promotive
eenvices sudh a6 ante-natal and post-natal care for women,
Immunisation for children, and contraception will conGnuc to be
subsidised for all those who need the services, Priority In allocation of
funds will be given to improving health care infrastructure ak the
community and primary healkh centres, sybsentre and village levels.
Erltical gaps In manpower will be remedied through redeployment,
partiqularly In underserved and Inaccessible areas, and referral
Inkages will be improved. In order bo implement irmrmoediately the
Acton Plan, ik would be necessary to dauble che annual budget of the
(hepartment of Family Welfare ta énablo gavemimnent to address the
shortfall In unmet needs for health care [nfrastcbure, services and
supplies (in Appendix], page 3G}.



45,

46.

Even bough the annual budget for populabon stabilisation actlyitles
assigned to the Department of Family Welfare has Increased over the
years, at ieast 50 percent of the budgetary outlay is deployed towards
non-plan actives (recurring expenditures for malntenarce of health
care [infrastructure in the states and UTs, and towards salaries), To
Nuctrate, of the annual budget of Rs. 2920 crores for 1999-2000,
néeady As 1500 érares 7s allaeated towards non-plan activities. Only
the remaining 50 percent becomes avallable for genuine plan
activities, Including pracurement of supplies and equipment. For
these reasons, since 1990 the Geparhment of Fanlly Welfare bas been
unable to revise norms of operational casts af health infrastructure,
which in turn has impacted directly the quallty af care and outreach of
servloes provided,

The follawing pramotlanal and rack¥ational measures will be
undertaken:

(I) Panchayats and Zila Parishads will be rewarded and honoured for
exemplary peronmance In unlversallsinga the sroall family arm,
achieving reductions in infant moertality and birth rates, and
promobng Ilteracy vith completion of primary scheeling,

(it) The Baltka Samndhi Yopana run by the Deparbrent of Wanen and
Chitd Development, to promaoke survival and care of the girl child,
will continue, A cosh incenbye of hs. SOO is awarded at the birth
ofkhe gl child of birth order Lor 2,

(lit) Mabermnity Benefit Scheme mun by the Oenartment af Rural
Develaprient will continue. A cash Incentive oF Rs, SOO is
awarded to mothers who have their first child after 19 years of
age, forbirth of the flrstor second child only, Gisbursemcnt ofthe
ch award willin future be linked bo compliance with ante-natal
check up, ([nstitutionsl dellvery by trained birth abtendant,
regletration of bith and BCG Immunisation.

Civ] 4A Family WielFare-linked Health Insurance Plan wall be established.
Couples below che poverty flne, who underge sterlitisattom with
nak mare than tee living children, would became eligible Calong
with children} for health Insurance [for hospitalisation) mot
exceeding Bs. S000, and & personal accident insuronce cover for
the spouse undergelng stenlisation,



fe) Couples below the poverty line, who marry afber the egal age of
marrlage, regisber the marriage, have thelr first child afer the
mother reaches the age of 21, accept the small family nom, and
adopt a terminal method after the birth of the second chlid, wilt
be rewarded.

ivi) A revolving fund will be sck up for income-gencrating activilics
by willage-level self help groups, who provide community-level
health care serviees.

Ovi} Creches and child care centres will bo opened [rn rural areas and
urban slums. This will Facilitate and promete participation of
women la paid employment.

Cyl). wider, affordable cholce of contraceptives will be made
accessible ak diverse delivery points, with counseling services bo
BAGG aCcEDTORS Co exerase voluntary and informed consent,

(tx) Faciiitles for safe abortion will be strenglhened and expanded,

Geb Pooducts and services will be made affordable thraugh
innovative sacral marketing schemes.

(zl) Letsl tntréprenicurs at village levels will be provided sore loans
and encouraged to run ambulance sernlees tg supplement the
exlSstlag arrangements for echerral transpartation,.

{xl Increased vocational tralaing schercs for girls, leading to selr-
employment will be encouraged.

(xiii) Strict enforcement of Child Marriage Restralmt Act, 1976.

(xiv Strict enforcement of the Pre-Natal Giagnostic Techniques Act,
1944,

(av) Sort loans ta ensure eoobiliby of the ANhs vill be [ncreased,

(xv The 42nd Constitutlonal amendment has frozen the number of
representatives in the Lok Sabha fon the basis of population) ak
197] Census levels, The freeze [5 currently valld until £001, and
has served as an incentive for State Governments to fearlessly
pursue the agenda for population stabilisation. This freeze needs
to be extended until 2026.



47. 0n the new millenium, natlons are judged by the veell-being of their
peontes; by levels of health, nutrition and education; by the clvll and
political liberties enjoyed by their citizens: by the protectian
guaranteed bo children and by provlelons made for the vulnerable and
the disadvantaged.

46. The vast numbers of the people of India can be its greatest asset if
they are provided with the means to lead healthy and economically
Productive lives. Population stabllisation is a multi-sectoral
endeavour requiring constant and effective dialague among a
diversity of sbakehalders, and cagrdination at all levets of the
government and soclety. Spread of literacy and education, inereasing
avallatllity of affentable reproductive and child health senAces,
convergence of service delivery at village levels, participatian of
women in the paid work force, together with & steady, equitable
improvement in Family Incomes, will fadlitabe eandy achievement of
the soclo-demographit goals. Success wit] ba achiowed if the “ection
Plan contained in the NPP 2000 és pursued as a national movernent.



Noi cavera> fcrvica livery O iirc
C. ip c Co! , f ViPS

bevels

Little village self help groups te organise and provide basic services
for reproductive and child health care, comblned with the ongoing
Integrated Child Bevelopraent Seherme (ICDS). Village self help
O0GUpS are in existence thraugh centrally sponsored schemes of: (a)
Department of Women and Child Gevclopment, Ministry oF HRD, (5)
Painistry of Rural Cevelopment, and ¢¢) Ministry of Envlranment and
Forests. Organise nelghbourhoed acceptor groups, and provide them
with a revolving fund that may be accessed for Income generatign
activities, The groups may establish rules of eligibllity, (ntercst rates,
Bhd aceounbability for which capital may be advanced, usually ta be
repaid in Installments within hyo years. The repayments may be used
to fund anather éecepter aroup in a nearby community, who vould
exert pressure to ensure [lmely repayments. Two tralned birLh
attendants and the aanganwadi worker (AWA) should be members of
this group.

Implement at village levels a one-step integrated and coordinated
service dellvery package for basic health care, Family planning and
maternal and child health related services, provided by che
community ed for the eooimunity. Train and motivate the village
sclFhelp acceptor groups to become the pamery contact at
household levels, Qnee every fortnight, these acceptor groups will
mecl, and provide atone place 6 different services for {)) registration
of births, de2ths, mariage and preqnancy; ii wetghing of children
under 5 tars, and recording the walght on a standard growth chart;
{ili} counseling and advocacy for contraception, plus free supply of
contraceptives; {iv} preventive care, with avallabilipy of basic
medicines for common allments: antipyretics for Fevers, antibiotic
clatments for infections, ORTORS' for childhood dlarrhoess,
Eogether with standardised Indigenous medication and homeopathic
cures; {¥) nutrition supplements: and [vl] advocacy and
encouragement for the contlnved enrelment of children in school up
to gge 14. One Realih staf, appointed by the panchayat, will be
suitably trained to provide guidance, Clustering services for women
and children at one place and time at village levels will pramote
positive interactions In health beneilts and reduce senvice delivery
costs.

Wherever these village self-help groups have not developed for any
reason, Community midwives, practitlaners of ISMH, mélired school
teachers end cx-defence personnel may Ge organised Into
neighbourhood groups ta perform similar functions.

Loony Repparsion Thorpe alrad Batpgratint Salle


AE village levels, the aanganwadl centre may become the plot of
Basic health care activities, contraceptive counsellng and supply,
nutnden education and supplementation, as well as preschool
acflvities. The aanganwadi centres can also functlon ag depots For
ORS Basle medicines and contrascphves.

Armaternity hut should be established In each village to be weed ag the
village delivery room, with storage space for supplles and medicines,
fr should be adequately equipped with kits for midwifery, ante-natal
care, and delivery; basic medication fer obstetrle emergency aid:
contraceptives, drugs and medicines fer common ailments: and
ladigencus medicines/supplies far materaal and new-born care. The
Panchayat may appolnt @ competent and mature mid-wife, to foak
Softer this village maternity hut. She may be assisted by yeluntcers.

Wained birth attendants as well as the vast pool of traditional dale
should be made familiar with emergency and referral procedures,
This will greatly assist the Auxiliary Nurse Midwife (AMM) at the
Subcantres to monitor and respend te maternal
morbldltyfemergeéncies at village levcts,

Each vitlaga may malntaln a [ist of community mid-wives, village
health guides, panchayat sewa sahayaks, trained birth attendants,
practitioners oF indigenous systems of medidne, primary scheal
ftachers and other relevant persons, as well as be nearest
Institutional health care faellitics that may be acoessed for Integrated
strwice dellvery, These persons may afsa be helpful In invalving ciul|
society In monitoring availability, quallty and accessibility of
reproductive and child health services; in disseminating education
and COMMUAleation on the Benefits af smaller and healthier Famille,
wih Canmphasis an education of the girl child; and female pa nitipation
inthe work forse,

Provide a wider basket of choices in contraception, through Innevative
Social marketing schemes ta reach household levels.

Comment : Meaningful decentralisation will pesult onty If the
convergence ef the national family welfare programme with the IOS
Bragranmine fs strengthened, The foous of the ICDS programme on
nutrition improvement at village levels and on pre-school activities
must be widened to Include maternal and chitd heallh care senices,
Convergence of several rélabed activities ab service dellvery levels
with, In particular, the ICOS programme, Is oritical for extending
eutrcach and increasing access to services. Intersectoral
coordination with appropriate training and sensleisation amang fel
functionaries will facilitate dissemination of integrated reproductive
And child health services bo village and household levels, People will

21


willingly ogperate in the registration of births, deaths, marriages and
pregnandes if they percelye some benehit At the village level, this
CAmmunity mecting every fortnight, may become their most
convenient access to basle health sare, both for mabernal and child
health, 25 well as for comman ailments. Households may participate
to receive inbegrated service delivery, afang with information about
engelng micro-credit snd thrift schemes, Government and vsea-
goverment functionaries will be expected to Function in harmony te
ensure Integrated service delivery, The panchayar will promote this
ceardination and exercise effectlye supervision,

(ii) Capowering WomenferImproved ticsha end
feutrition

1. Create an enabiing environment for women and children toe benefit
from preducts and services disseminated under Wie reproductive and
child health programmé. Clusler services for women and children at
ihe same place and time. This promotes positive interactions In
health benetlts and r@duces service delivery costs.

2. AS ameasure to empower women, open mare child care centres In
Turd! areas and in urban stums, where a womeén worker may leave her
children in responsible hands. This will encourage female
Partidpation in paid employment, reduce schoel drop-out rates,
pacthularly for the girl child, and promeate school enrealment a5 well,
The aanganwadis prowide @ partldl solution,

3. To empower women, @UrSue programmes af social afforestation te
facilitate aocess to fuelwood and fodder. Similady, pursue drinking
waber schemes for Increasing 2008s to potable water This will reduce
long absences from home, and the need for large numbers ef children
bo pectorm such tasks,

4. Inany reward scheme Intended for household levels, prority may be
glven te cnergy saving devices such 45 solar cookers, of provision oF
sanitation faciiltles, ar extensian of telephone fines. This velll
empower households, in particular women,

So. Improve district, sub-district and panchayat-level health
Management with coordination and collaboration between district
health officers, sub-district health offlear and the panchayat for
Manning and Implementation activilies. There is need to:

m Strengthen the referral nehwerk bebveen the district health

office, district hospital and the community health ecnbres, che

155] Primary health centres and the subcentres in management of
abskebric and neo-natal compllcatians,



me Strengthen coramunity health centres to provide comprehensive
émengency obstetric and ncdenatal care, These may function a5
dinical training centres as well. Strengthen primary health
fentres to provide essential obstetric and neo-natal care,
Strengthen subeentres to provide @ comprehensive range of
services, with delivery roams, counseling for sontmceptian,
supplies of frac contraceptives, G25 and basic medicines,
bogether with facilities for irnrniuntsation.

@ Establish rigorous problern identification macharisms through
maternal ad petri-natal audit, from village level upwards.

8. Ensure adequate transportation at village level, subeentre levels, zlla
farishads, primary health centres and at community health centres.
identifying women at risk is meaningful only if women with
complications can rtach emergency care in time.

*. Improve the actessibility and quality of maternal and child health
Services through:

es Deployment of community mid-wlhyes and additional health
providers at village levels; clusber services for wornen and
children at the sane place and time, from village level upwards,
&.9. anbeendtal and post-partum care, monitoring lafart growth,
availability of contraceptives and medicine kits; and routinised
lmirnunisétions at subcentre levels,

mw Strengthen the capacity of primary health centres te provide
basic emergence? obstetric and neg-natal health care.

© Involve professional agencies In developing and disseminating
training modules for standard procedures In the pnanagement of
obstebic and neo-natal cases, The aim should be to routinise
these provedures at all appropriate levels.

me = Iriprove supervislon by developing guidance and supervision
checklists,

B. Monitor performance of mabernal and child heallh serdces at each
level by using the maternal and child health local area monitaring
system, which indiudes meniboring the Incidence and coverage of
anbe-natal visits, deliveries assisted by trained health care persoanel
ard post-natal visits, aridng other indicaters, The ANM at che
subcentre should be responsible and accountable for registering
every pregnancy and child birth in her jurisdiction, and for providing | 23
universal ante-natal and post-natal services,



9. Inprove technical skills af matemal and child health care providers

Dy:

a Strengthening skills of health personnel and health providers
through classroom and on-the-job training in the management of
obsbetnic and n@o- natal emengenclas. This should include tralning
of birth athendants and community midwives at district-level
hospitals in life-saving skills, such as Management of asphyxia
and hypothermia.

a Tratning on integrated management of childhood illnesses for
infants ( Lweek - 2 months).

LO. Support community activities such as dissemination of TEC materlal,
including leaAets and posters, and promotion of folk jatras, songs and
dances bo promote healthy mother and healthy baby messages,
alang with good management practices to ensure safe motherhgad,
Including carly recognition of danger signs.

L1. Pragramme development, comprising:

= Partnership in Family health and nutrition. The asriganwadi
worker will dently women and children in the villages who suffer
rem malnutrition andor micro-nutritional deficiencics, ineluding
lron, vitamin 4, and indtne deflelency; provide nubitiensl
supplerments and monikor nutritional status,

= (Convergence, strengthening, and universalisatlan of the
nutfitional programmes of the Department of Family Welfare and
the [COS num by the Departmert of Women and Child
Development, ensuring training and timely supply af food
supplements énd medicines.

as Incdude STO/RTI and HIV/OIGS prevention, screening and
Management, In maternal and child health services,

e Provide quality care in farnily planning, including [nformotion,
Increased contraceptive chaices far both spacing and terminal
methods, Increase aceess ta good quality and affordable
contraceptive supplies and services at diverse delivery polnts,
counseling shout che safety, efficacy and possible side effects of
each method, and appropriate Follow-up.

12. Gevelop a health packages for adolescents,

12. Expand the availability of safe abortion care. Abortion is legal, Due
there are barrces limiting women's access to sate abortlon servives.
Some operational strabegles are:
= Community-level education campalgns should target wamen,
r : household decision makers and adolescents about the availability
2 4. af safe abertion sendces and the dangers of unsafe abortion.


a Make safe and legal abortion services more athracthye to women
and household decision makers by {f) Wereasing gecgra pric
spread; fii) enhancing affordability; (iii) ensuring confidentially
and fiv) providing compassionate abortlan care, inctuding post-
abortion counseling.

s Adopt updated and cimple technologies that are safe and easy,
e.g, manual vacuun extrachion not necesserlty dependant ypoan
anaesthesia, or non-surgical techniques which are nan-lrveasive.

« Promote collaborative arrangements with private sector health
professionals, NGOs and the public sector, Co lnercase the
availability and coverage of safe ahortion services, including
training of mid-level providers.

= Eliminate the current cumbersome procedures for registration oF
abortion dfinics. Simplify and facilitate the establishment of
additional training ¢entres fer safe abortions In the public,
private, and Nod sectors. Train these health care providers in
provision of elinical services forsafe abortions.

Formulate and notify standards for abortion services. Strengthen
enforcement mechanisms at district and sub-district tewels bo
engure that these nanims aré Follavwred.

a Follow norms-based registration of service prowlslon centres, and
thereby switch the onus of meticulous observance of standards
onte the provider.

a Provide competent post-abortion tare, including management of
complications and Identification of ether health needs of post-
abortion patients, and linking with appropriate services. As part
of post-abortlan cere, physicians may be trained bo provide
familly planning counseling and services such as stediisation, and
reversible modern methods such as js, a3 well as oral
contraceptlwes and condoms.

a Modify syllabus and curricula for medical graduates, as well as for
continuing education and in-house leaming, ta provide for
practical tralning In the newer procedures,

a Ensure services for terriaabion of pregnancy et primary health
centres and at community health centres.

44, Develop maternity hospitals at sub-district levels and at community
health centres to functlon aS FRUs for complicated and life-
threatentng dellycrics.

15. Formulate and enforce standards for clinical services in the public, 36
private, and NGO sectors. ‘



|
|

26

24,

17,

Facus of distibution of man-elinical methods of contraception
{condoms and oral contraceptive pills} through free supply, social
mMarkcting as wells commercial sales.

Create a national network consisting of public, prvate and WOO
centres, identified by a camemnon lage, for dellyering reproductive and
child health services free ko any cient, The provider will be
compensabed for the service provided, on the basis of a coupon, duly
countersignad by the benaficlary, and paid for by a system Lo be
devised. The compensation will be identical bo providers across all
sectors, The end-user will choose the provider of the service, 4 group
of management experts will devise checks and balances to prevent
rlsuse..

Support community activities, Fram village level upwards to monitor
early and agequate ante-natal, matal and post-natal care. Pocus
atbention on neonatal health care and nutrition.

Set up a National Technical Commiltee on ne@c-natal care, to allan
programme and project Intervantions with newly emerging
cechnologles in neo-natal and peri-naélal care.

Pursue computsary regisha ban of births in coordi nation with the COS
Programme,

Alter the bleth of a child, provide counseling and advocacy about
contraception, ko encourage adaption of a reversible or a terminal
method. This will algo cantribute to the health and well-being of both
mather and dhild.

Improve capacities at health centres in basle midwifery services,
essential reo-natal care, Including the management of sick néeo-
nates outside the hospital.

Sensitise and brain health personnel in the Integrated management of
childhood Wlinesses. Standard case management of diarrhoea and
acute respiratory infeclions must be provided at subcentres and
prienary health centres, with appropriate training, and adequate
equipment, Besides, training In this sector may be imparted to healLh
care providers at village levels, especially in indigenous systems.

Strengthen erltleal interventions aimed at bringing about reductions
in mabernal malnutrition, marbldlty and mortality, by ensuring
avallabllity of supplles and equipment at village levels, and at sub
centres,



10.

Li.

12.

13,

14.

Pursue nmigorcusly the pulse polio campaign bo eradicate potia.

Ensure LOO percent routine iramunisation for all vaccine preventable
diseases, in particular betanus and measles.

AS a child survival Initiative, explore promotional and motivational
measures for couples below the poverty line who marry after the lagal
age of mantage, Lo hawe the first child after the mother reaches the
ge of 21, and adopt a tenminal method of contraception after the
birth of the second child.

Children form a vulnerable group and certain sub-groups merit
Focused attention and intervention, such as street children and child
labourers. Encourage voluntary groups 45 well as NGOs to formulate
and Implement spccial schemes for these groups of children.

Explore the feasibility of a national health Insurance covering
hospitalisation costs for children below S years, whose parents have
adopted the small family norm, and opted for a terminal methed of
comtraception after the birth of the second child,

Expand the ECOS to include children behveen 6-9 years of age,
Specifically to pranate and ensure 100 percent school enrolment,
Particularly for girls. Promote primary education with the help of
danganwadi workers, and encourage rebention in school tillage 14,
Educatlon promotes awareness, late mamages, small family size and
higher child survival rates,

Provide vocational training for girls, This will ¢nhance perceptlan of
the Immediate ubility of educating gids, and gradually raise the
averaged oge2 of marriage. It wlll also Increase enrélmentand retentloan
of gids at primary school, and likely also at secondary school tevels,
Invele WGOs, the voluntary sector and cho private sector, as
necessary, to target em ployment opportunities.

’ -

(v) (Peorned tho Unaict Wools fer Faniuly Woivore
ooreecrs
strengthen, energisa and make publicly accountable the cutting edge

of health infrastructure at the village, sub¢entre and primary health
centre levels,

Address an priority the different unmet needs detailed In appendix Dv,
in Particular, an increase In mural Indrasteucture, deployment of
Sanctioned and appropriately brained health personnel, and
provisioning ofeséential equipment and drugs,

Farmuylate and Implement innovative soclal marketing schemes to
Provide subsidised products and services in anéas where the existing
coverdge of the public, privabe and MEO sectors Is insuillelonein arder
Bo [herease ouiresch and overage,



4. Improve facilities for referral transportation at panchayat, zilla
Parishéd and primary health centre levels, At subcentres, provide:
ANMs with sof loans for purchase of mopeds, to enhance their
mobility. This vill Increase coverage of ante-natal and post natal
check-ups, which, in turn, and will bring about reductions in maternal
and infant martality,

5. Encourige local entrepreneurs at village and block levels to start
ambulance services through spedal loan schemes, with appropriate
vehicles bo facilitate transportation of parsons requiring emergency
as wallas e=sential medical attention,

G Provide special loan schemes and make site allotments at village
levels ba facilitate the starting of chemist shops for basic medicines
and provision fer medical flrst aid,

(wi) Uclor-f ore. dP opuletion Grours

(a) Urban Sluis
1. Finalise a cemprchensive urban health care strategy.

2. Facilitate service delivery centres in urban slums to provide
comprehensive basic health, repraduetive and child health services
by NGOs and private sector organisations, Including corporate
howses.

3, Promote networks of rebred government doctors and para-rnedical
and fon-rniedical personnel who may functlon as health care
providers For clinical aad non-clinicalsersiees an remunerative terms.

4. Strengthen social marketing programrnaes for non-clinical Family
planning products and serviees in urban slums.

2. [nitiabe specially targeted Information, adueation and communication
campaigns fer urban slums on familly planning, immuntzation, ante-
natal, hatal and post-natal check-ups and other reproductive health
care Services. Inteymte aggressive Wealth education programmes
with health and medical ¢&re programmes , with emphasis on
environmental Health, personal hyglene and healthy habits, riutritian
education and population education.

6. Promote inter-sectoral coordination between départments/ municipal
bodies dealing wilh water and sanilation, industry and poltution,
housing, transport, education and nutntion, aad women and child

f development, to deal with unplanned and wunceerdinated
28

settlements,



Streamline the referral systems and linkages between the primary,
secondary and tertiary levels of health care dn the urban areas.

Link the provision of cantrived facilities bo urbarm slur dwellers with
thelr observance of the small family norm.

(6) Tribal Communitics, Hill Area Populations aid Displaced
and Migrant Populatlans

Many tribal communities are dwindling in numbers, and may notneed

fertility regulation. Insbead, they may need infonmation and

counseling in respect oF infertility.

The NGO sector may be encouraged La formulate and Implement a
sysbem of preventlye and curative health care that responds to
seasonal Variations in the avallabllity of werk, income and food for
tribal and hill area communities and migrant and displaced
Populations. To begin with, mobile dintcs may provide some degree of
regular coverage and gutreach.,

Many tribal communities are dependent upon indigengus systems of
medicine which necessitates a regular supply of focal flora, fauna and
minerals, or af standardised medication derved from these,
Husbandry of such local reseurces and of preparation and distributlen
of standardised fanmulations should be encouraged.

Health care providers in the publle, private and NGOs sectors should
be sensitised to adopt a “burden of disease" approach to meet the
special needs of bibal and hill area communities.

{c} Adolescents

Ensure for adolescents access to information, counseling and
services, Including reproductive health serviees, that are affordable
and 4¢ccesible. Strengthen primary health centres and subcentres, to
provide cavnseling, both to adolescents and also be newhy weds (who
may also bo adolescents}. Emphasise proper spacing of children.

Provide far adolescents the package of nutritional services available
under the ICOS proegrarnrmnc.

Comment: Improvements in health status of sdelescent girs has an
inler-generational Impact, it reduces the risk of love bieth weight and
minimizes peo-natel mortality. Malnutrition is a problem that
Scridusly impairs the health of adolescent and 2dutt women and has
its roots tn early childhood, The caysal lInkages between anaemta and
low birth weight, prematurity, peri-natal mortality, and matemal
mortallty has been extensively studied and established.

29



5, Enforce the Child Marrlage Restraint “ct, 1976, to reduce the
incidence oF beenage pregnandcs. Preventing the marriage of gids
below the lagally permissible age of 12 should become a national
conoern.

Cooment: It vill proraebe higher retention of gids at schools, and is
alsa likely to encourage their participation Inthe paid work force.

4, Provide inbegrabed intervention in pockets with unmet needs in the
urban slurs, rernete rural areas, border districts and ameng tribal
populations.

(J) Tncrccl ot fat ticicchca of
Porcnihecd
1. Foous atbentign on men In the Information and education campaigns
to promete the small family norm, and to raise awareness by
emphasising the significant benefits af fevser children, betber spacing,
Better heallh and nutrition, and better education.

2, Currently, aver 97 percent ef the sterliisations are tubectomles.
fteapopularise wacectomies, in particufar the no-scalpel vasectomy, oS
a safe, simple, palnless procedure, more convenient and acceptable
bo meri.

9. Inthe continuing education and training at all levels, there is need ba
ensure that the na-sealpel vasectoniy, and all swch emerging
bechniques and skills are included in the syllabi, together with
abundant practical training. Medical gradyates, and all those
participating in "iqecervice” continuing education and taining, will be
equipped Lo handle Ihis intervention.

(vii) Diverse Hoalth Care Providers

1. At dislrict and sub-district levels, maintain block-wise a data base of
private medical practitioners whose credentials may be certified by
the Indian Medical Association (iMaA), Explore tne possiblity af
accrediting these pnvate pracitioners fora year ata time, and assign
to each a satellite population, not excecding 5,000 (depending upon
distances and spread), far whom they may provide reproductive and
child health serviecs. The private practitioners would be
compensated for the services rendered through designated agencies.
Renewal of caonbacts after ane year may be guided by cllent
satisfaction. This will serve as an incentive to expand the coverage
and outreach of high quality heallh carc. Appropriate checks and
balances will safegua-d misuse.

3. fevive the earier system of the licensed medical practitioners whit,

30 after appropriate certification from the (4, ciay partlelpate In the

provision of clinical services.



a

Involve The non-medical fraterniby in counseting and advecacy sos
to demystify the national family ywelfare effort, Such as retired
defence personnel, retired school beachers and other persans whe are
acthve and willlng to get invalved.

Modify the underpost-graduate medical, nursing, and pararncdical
professional course syllabi and curricula, in consultation with the
Medical Council oF India, the Councils of IShH, and the Indlan Nursing
Gouncil, in order to reflect the contcets and Implementathon
strabegles of the reproductive arid child health programme and the
national population policy, This will also be applied to all in-service
brining and educational cumicula,

Ensure the efficient functioning of the First Referral Units t.e, 30 bed
hospitals at block levels which provide emergency obstetrle and child
Realth care, fo Bring about reductions in Maternal Mortality Ratio
(MMP) and Infant Mortality Rabe fIMR}. In many states, these FRUs
arc not operational on account of an acute shortage of speciallsts |.e,
gynaecologist/obstetriclan, anaesthetist 2nd pediatrician, Augment
Ine avaitabliity of specialists In these three diselptines, by increastny
seats In medical institutlans, and simultaneously enable and facilitate
the acquisition of In-service post-graduabe qualifications through the
Hational Board of Medical Examination and open universities like
TSNOU in larger numbers. As an Incentive, seats will be reserved for
those in-service medical graduates who are velllifig to abide by 4 bond
fo Strve for 5 years at First Referral Units after completion of the
course. Skates would need to sanction posts of Specialists at the
FRUS, Further, these specialists should be provided with clear
promation charincls.

(viit) (2) Collobercstion with ond Conunitmiont:

froni tao flon-Governniont€crtcr

1. There remain ifmumerabte hurdfes that Inhibit genuine leng-kern

collaboration behveen the qavermment and non-government sectors,
A forum of representatives from government, the Aon-govemmenk
organisations and the privabe sector may identify these hurdles and
prepare guidelines that will facilitate and promote collaborative
arrangements.

Collaboration with and commitments from NGOs to augment
Advocacy, counsellng and clinical services, while accessing village
Jevels, THIS will require Inereased clinke outlets as well as pnebile
clinics.

Collaboration between he voluntary secbor and the NGOs will
Fadlitate dissemination of efficlent service dellvery to village levels,
The guidelines could articulate the rote and responsibility of each
sector,



Encourage the voluntary sector bo motivate village-level self-help
groups to participate In commucity actlvitle,

Specie collaboralfon with the non-government sector In the social
marketing of oconkracephves to reach village levels will be
encouraged,

(wit) (Ob) Coloboraneoa wiih oad Conimitcrents

fronmincustry

The corporate sector and industry could, fer instance, take on the
challenge of strengthening the management Information systems in
the seven most deficient states, at primary health centre and
sybcentre levels. Introduce electronic data entry machines to lighten
the tedious werk toad of ANMS and the multi-purpose workers at
subcentras and the dacters at the primary health centres, while
enabling wider coverog¢ and qucreach.

Collaborate with non=govemmoent sectors in cunning professionally
sound advertisement and marketing campalgns for products and
senrices, targeGng all segments of the population, Fram village level
upwards, In other words, strengthen advecacy and IEC, including
social] marketing of controceptives.

Provide markets to sushain the income-generaking activities from
village levels upwards. In turn, Chis will ensure consistent mativatien
among the community For pursuing healkh and educationerclated
Sornmiuaily ackiwilles,

Help promote transpertation ba remake and ingecessible areas up to
village levels, This will greatly asslet the coverage and outreach of
social marketing of products and services,

The cocial responsibility of the corporate secbor in industry mriust, af
the very minimum, extend te providing preventive reproductive and
child health care for its own employees (if 2100 werkers ore
engaged),

Create a national netwark consisting ef voluntary, public, privabe and
non-government health centres, identified by a commen laga, for
delivering reproductive and child health services, free ta any client,
The provider will be compensated for the service provided, an the
basis of a coupon system, duly counter-slaned by the beneficlary and
pald For by a system that wall be folly articulated, The compensation
will be identical bo providers, across all sectors. The end user
exercises choices in the source of service deliver, A commithee of
Mansgemenkt experts will be set up to devise ways of ensuring that
this system is not abused.



Forni a consortium of the voluntary sector, the non-government
sector and the private corporate sector to ald government in the
provision and outreach of basic reproductive and child health care
and basic education.

In the area of basic education, set up privately run/managed primary
schools for children uptoage 14-15. Alternately, ifthe schools are set
up/managed by the panchayat, the private corporate sector Gould
provide the mid-day meals, Ube text books and/or the uniforms,

(ix) Moainstrosmiuing Indica Syctoms of ficcdicine
ond Momcojauiy

Provide appropriate training and orientation In respect of ine ACH
programme for the institutionally qualified ISMH medical
practitioners {already educated In midwifery, obstetrics and
aynaecology over 5-1/2 years}, and utilise thetr services bo fillin gaps
In manpower at approp rate levels in the health Infrastructure, and at
subcentres and primary health centres, asmecessary.

Utilise the ISMH institutions, dispensaries and hospitals for health and
population related programmes.

Disseminate the tried and tested concepts and practices of the
indigenous sysbems of medicine, together with ISMH medication at
village maternity huts and at household levels for ante-natal and
post-natal care, besides nurture of the newbom,

Utilise the services of ISMA ‘barefoot doctors’ after appropriate
training and orlentation towards providing advocacy and counseling
for disseminating supplles and equipment, and as depot holders at
village levels.

» >

Government will encourage, support and advance the pursuit of
medical and social selence research on reproductlye and child health,
In consultation with ICMB and the network of academic and research
institutions.

The Intematianal Institute of Population Sciences and the Population
Research Centres will continue to review programene and monitering
Indicators te ensure thelr continued relevance ta strategic goals,

Cevernment will restructure the Populatian Research Centres, if
necessary.

33



Standards for clinical and non-clinical Interventions will be issued and
regularly reviewed.

4A o¢onskant review and evalvation of the communilby needs
assessment approach will bo pursued bo allgn programme delivery
with geod management practices and with newly emerging
tachnologies.

A cammittee of inbernational and Indian experts, voluntary and none
govyemirment organisations and government may be set up to
regulady review and rmcommend specific Incorporation of the
advances in contraceptive technology and, in parlitular, the newly
emerging bechniques, inte programme development.

(i) Providing ferthe Glooerfopnulation

Sensitize, train aad 4qulp mural and urban health centres and
hospitals towards providing geriatri¢ heallh care,

Encourage NGOs and voluntary onganizations La formulate and
etrengthen a senes of formal and Infgmmal avenues that maké the
eldecly eeonamilcally self-reliant.

Tax benefits could be explored as an encouragement for children te
look after their aged parents.

(li) Infarniction Ccuccsticn ond Communication

Converge IEC effarts across the soclal sectors. The tee sectors of
Family Welfare and Education have coordinated a mutually
supportive IEC strateay, The Zila Saksharta Samitis design and
deliver joint [EC campaigns in the local idiom, promoting the cause of
literacy as well as family welfare. Gptimal use of folk media has
cerved to successfully mobilize local populations, The state of Tamil
Nadu made exemplary use of the TEC strategy by spreading the
message through every possible media, inclading public transport, on
mile stunes on national high ways as well as through advertisement
and hoardings on roadsides, along city/rurel mads, on billboards, and
through processions, films, school dramas, public meetings, local
theatre and folk songs.

Involve departments of rural development, social welfare, transport,
cooperatives, education vith special reference to schools, bo leiprove
darity and focus of the IEC elfort, and to extend coverage and
dqutreach. Health and population education rnust be Inculcated from
the school levels,

Fund the nagar palikas, panchayats, Ntsls and community
erga nizations far Interactlye and participabory IEC activilles.



4.

he

Gemenstration of suppark by elected leaders, opinion makers, and
religleus leaders with close involvement inthe reproductiye and child
health programme grcaby Influences the behaviour and response
pattems of individuals and communities, This serves to enthuse
communitics to be attentive towards the quality and coverage of
maternal and child health services, intluding ¢eferral care, Public
leaders and film stars could spread widely the messages of the small
family nom, female liberacy, delayed marriages for women, fewer
babies, healthier babies, chitd immunization and so on. The
Invglvement and enthusiastic participation of elected leaders will
ensure dedicated involvement of administrators at district and gub-
district levels. Demonstration of strong support to the small family
norm, as well as personal example, by political, community, business,
professional, and religious Ieaders, media and film stars, sports
personalities and oplnign makers, will enhance its aceeptance
throughout socieby.

Utilise radia and television a3 the rast povrerful media for
disseminating relevant soclo-demagraphic messages. Goverament
cavtld explore the Feasibility oF appropriate regulations, and even
legislablion, if necessary, ta mandate the broadcast of social messages
during prime time,

Utillse dalry cgoperatives, the public distributian systems, other
established ncLwarks like the LIC at districk and sub-district levels for
IEC and fer distribution of contracepives and Basie medicines to
target infant/childhood diarrhoeas, angemla and malnutrition among
édolescent girls and pregnant mothers. This will widen cutreach and
coverage.

Sensitise the field Ievel functlanarlas across diverse sectors
[cducation, rural development, forest and envirenment, wore and
child development, drinking water mission, cooperatives) to the
stroicgics, goals and objectives of the population stabilisation
pragrammes.

Invelve ¢lvll seclety for disseminating information, counseling and
spreading education about the small faruly norm, the need For fewer
but healthier bables, higher female literacy and later marriages for
wamen. Civil society could alse be of assistance In monitoring che *
availability of contraceptives, vaccines and drugs in rural areas and Ira
urban slums.



36

19465
Bhore Gommithes Report

1452
Launching of Farnily Planning Programme

1976
Statement of ational Population Palicy

Lov?
Policy Stabementon Family Welfare Prograrrnifne

Both statements were lald on the Table of the House in Patlament, Gut
never discussed oradapted.

1983
The Natlanal Health Policy of L983 emphasized the need for “securing

the small family norm, through voluntary efforts and moving cowards
the goal of population stabilisation*. While adopting the Health Policy,
Farliament emphasized the need for a scparate National Population
Paley,

A991
The National Cevelopment Council appalnted a Commithee on

Population with Shri Karunaeran as Chainnan, The Karuinakaran
Report (Report of the National Development Council (NDC)
Committee on Population) andorsed by MDC in 1993 proposed the
Fermiutation of a National Population Pallcy to kake a "8 long term
holistic view of development, population grewth and environmental
protection” and to “suggest policies and guidelines (for) ferriullatian
oF programs” and “a monitoring mechanism wilh shart, mediurn and
long term perspectives and goals" (Flanning Commission, 1992). ft
was argued that the earlier policy statements of 1876 and 1977 were
placed gn the table, however, Parllament never really discussed or
adopted them, Specifically, it was meommended that "a National
Paley of Population should be formulated by the Government and
adopted by Parliament".

1994
Ain Expert Group headed by Or. M.9. Swaminathan was asked to

prepare a dratt ofa national population pollcy that would be discussed
by the Cabinetand then by Parlament.

1994
Report ona Mational Papulation Policy by the Expert Group headed hy

Br. Swaminathan, This report was clrevlated among Members of
Parliament, and comments requested from central and state
agencies, It yas anticipated that @ national population policy
approved by the Nalional Development Council and the Parliament
would help pradyce a broad political consensus.



1o57
Qn the 50th anniversary of India's Independence, Prime Minister

Gujral promised to announce a Natlonal Population Policy in the near
future. Ciusing 11/97 Cabinet approved the draft National Population
Pelicy with the direction chat this be placed befera Parliament.
However, thls document could not be placed In elther Howse of
Paniament as the respective Houses stood adjaurned Follayed by
dissalutionof the Lok Sabha.

1499
Another round of cansultations was held during 1996, and another

draft National Population Polley was finalised and placed before the
Cabinet in March, 1999. Cabinet appointed a Group of Ministers
{headed by Dy Chainman, Planning Gonrmlssian} té &xa mine the dratt
Polley. The SOM met stveral times and deliberated aver the nuances
oF the Population Polley. In order to finalise a view obout the
Indusionfexctusion af [ncentives and disincentives, the Group of
Ministers invited a cross-section of experts from among academia,
public health professionals, demographers, soclal sclentists, and
womens representatives. The GOM finalised a draft population
Polley, and placed the same belor: Cabinet, This was discussed it
Cabinet on 19 Movember, 1999. Several sugqgestlans were made
during the deliberations, On that basis, & fresh draft was submitted to
Cabinet.



Indla Is follawing the demographic transttign pattem of all developing
ceuetriés Fron taiwal tewels of “high birth rabe - high death mete” to the
current Intanmediate transitign stage of ™hlgh birth rate - low death rate"
which teads Lo high rates of population growth, before graduating to
fevels oF lays birth rate - low death rabe",

ae See

1. (i) The age distribution of the population of India is projected to
change by 2016, and these changes should determine allacatian
of resources in policy intervention. The population below 15 years
ofage (currently 35 percent) is projected to decline to 2 percent
by 2016. The population inthe age group 15 = 59 years [currently
So percent] ls projected to Increase bo nearly 4 percent by 2016,
The age group of G0 plus years is projected to increase fram the
current levels of ? percent to nearly 9 percent hy 2016.

Below Between Bebreen + 60 years
Syeare Ge15 215-59 years

12.86 37.76 $5.53 6.67
10.70 34.32 ao, 70 6.97
ig.1o | 23.48 63.38 4.14

oF ea | 63.33 A.o4

2. Inter-State Cificrences

2. (i) India is a country of striking demographic diversity. Substantial
differences are visible between states Inthe achievement of basle
demagraphie indites. This has ted ta significant disparity in
current population size and the potential te influence population
inereases dunng 1996-27016, There are wide inter-state, males
female and rural-urban dispanties in gutcames and Impacts.
These differcnecs stern largely fram poverty, illikeracy, and
inadequate access to health and family welfare services, which
coexist and reinforce each other In many parts, the widespread
healih infrastructure is not responsive.

2. G7) Ab least & stabes and onion territories in India have already
achleved replacement levels of fertility. These are ranked In
accomdance with their totol fertility rotes. Additianally, in each of
the three tables belaw, the currenk population ef each
Stalefunian ternbary, the catia of this papulatian te the country
population, the Infant martallty rake and the contraceptive
prewalenee mabe ofthe sbsbe f union tenibory § also indicabed:

2 Treiman Group on Fonutitio Aafcaions, Panning Carimissig,



(Hdl tbo le de ti Enea ‘ofeadrtbic

Tabie 5: Fopul.ticn Pechts of & States ond Union Territcel:; of

Inca vach TER lois than crecjustts 2.1

Population | Percentof| Total | Infant | Centraceptlys
Siza Total Fertility |Mortallty| Prevalence
{in millons) | Population; Hate Rata Rate
Sion 1997 1995 1959)
1 March ‘
1999* |

921.5 rel 44 oy
Group A¢TRR less than or equal ta 2.1)

Goa 1.5 0. 24 afl
Nagaland 1. OF hla 7.8
Gethi 134 140 36 23.8
Kerala 22,0 cc . 16 40.5
Pondichery ii O1 | ai 56.9
Aah Islands a4 0.04 30 39.9
Tatil Nadu 61.5 6.2 O 3 a0 ,4
Chandigarh ag 0.09 a2 35.0
Mizoram og 0.049 ! 34.6

Bo Treo paar ageing) aeerage Td 245-57

* Population Arajections oy Tortie! Gru an Poauishion Frofectans, 2958

Clin S Rs ror Or acrectlotrecia

2. fii) There are 11 states and union territories that have a total fertility
rate of mere than 2.1 but Jess than 3.0, ranked accordingly :

Drom Pronit ofl Statrs and Union Termitcrics
CFIR LS wth TR > 21 bute 3

Population |Percentaf | Total | infant |Contriceptive
Sizg Total Feruilty Mortality) Prevalence
(im rillfans) | Population) Bate © Rate Rate
iggy 1998 i509

Group & (TPR = 2.1 and <than3.o)
f 2.24 o2 | 24
aman & Diu 0.4 O01 | 25a
51.4 Feet ( 2&5

74.6 7.6

6.5 | a7

o.5 | 0.08
Fa

Oth. 1 a2
24

1.2 O.1
O01



@:  egsciear . pin. co oe hy fag

Taree peer moeagaversge Tt 95-47
FOS We Dat Prolecbans of Techatcalareeane Popuatian Pojecuons, 2555

1 ashe re

sb Ry

wet de -

2. (hv) However, there are at least 12 states and union territerles that
have & total fertility rate of over 3.0. These have been listed
Belovs:

culntirabairiabo chan cst
ye. TR corsctcrtncaercoy:

Population | Percantef | Total | Infant rontraceptive
Sire Total Fertility |Mockallty| Prevalence

{in millians) |) Papulstion | Rate
a3so0n 1907
1 March
190g"
iGrevp t (3.0)
Orissa 35.5
Gujarat 47.6

Assam 25,6

Haryana 19,5

Ly
Tri plire 3.6
Meghalaya 2.4

Madhya
Pradesh 72.3

| Rajasthan | 52.6
Bihar 93.1

Uttar
Pradesh 166.4

Bo Thee pea’ Mie average THR] RAS ae
= Pgauwohion Frojecbons oy Sechrical aroun Roo ual Freecctiovis, 2 ty

Slaves To ltr Coa ricton ioc la

2. (vi The five states of Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Rajasthan and

Uttar Pradesh that currently constitube neandy 44 percent of the

total population of India, are pregecked toe comprise 46 percent of

the total population In 2006, In other words, these states alorie

will contribube an anticipated 55 percent Increase during the

period 1996-2016. Demographic outcomes in these states will

A0| determine the timing and size of population at which India

—_—— achieves population stablllsatian.



pele ‘ro ‘Pttertatile
. . ta hee were

2

tal

3. (1) With 16% of the world’s population, India accounts for over 20%
of the world's maternal deaths, The mabernal mortality ratio,
defined as the number of matemal deaths par 100,000 live
births, ls inemedibly high at 4068 per 100,000 live births for the
country (1997), which [5 unacceptable when compared bo current
indices efsewherd in Asia.

Srilanka China (Thalland Pakistan Indonesia India |Bangladesh|Mfepal
30 | 115 | 200

Kerala | Blhae | Modbya Pradesh’ Rafesthan |Uttor Pradesh! Orises
oF | 451

“. Infanttiortrhiy

4. [tis estimabed that about ¥ pertent of new-born Infants pensh within
a year, Poor matemial health results In low birth weightand premature
babies. Infant and childhood diarrhoeal diseases, acute mspiratory
infections and malnutrition contribute to blah infant mortality rabes,
Additionally, in Indla, acrass the board troral or urban areas), there
are more female deaths in the age grayp of 0-14 than elsewhere? ,
Although Lhe Infant Mortality Rate (IMR) has decreased from 146 per
[O00 Births in 1951 te 72 per 1000 births (1997), and the sex
differentials are narrowing, again there are wide inter-state
differences recovded in 1998, as is clear front Table 4-8, In
eOM parison, we note the infant mortality rates In South Asia and
elsewhere:

Sr] Lanka | China/Thalland Pakistan Indoneslal India Bangladesh Nepal
1B ‘1 ror | 74 | a3

4

7 OMFRA, The State of forte Popiehes, 2580. 9 iio - 4 Time for Grates, 2995 estates.
4 Registrar Genera of laicia.

3 IEF, The Progress oF Indien Stones, 995, fads Coumiq Giice, Neve Sch

6 LP, Tie State of tho Fork Peputation, 22900 6 dition 24 Tina tye Cheers,



wae TVR BT
5. CSkATtio

5, (hh) India shares a distinctive feature of South Astan and Chinese
populations as regards the sex ratiq, with a century's old deficit of
females. The (female to male) sex ratio has been steadily
declining. From 1901 te 1991, the sex ratio has decined from
OF? bo 927, This is largely attribubed to the son prefernce,
discrimination against the gic child leading to lower female
literacy, female foetiade, higher fertility and hlgher mortality
lewels for females, In all age groups up te 45.



The unmet need for contraceptive services is estimated at 28%,
necessitating an additionality of approx. Fs. LS0 crores (for
cantaceptles, laprascopes, tubal rings, voccines. and RCH drugs}.
Health infrastructure ls nadequake, with estimated shortages as:

7,683 subcantres (1901), now estimated at 23,190 subcentres for
the projected population in Year 2002. Capital cost of one subcentre ls
Rs, Séacs, witha recuning costo Rs. 0.5 lacs, Whe Finance Pinister in
his Budget Speech, 1999-2000, announced ag scheme for
chrengthening rural health infrastructure, to be implemented with
responsibility far funding shared between the panchayat, stabe and
central governments. Accordingly, the Bepartment of Farcily Welfare
is Formulating @ scheme for apening new subcentres where required,
providing buildings and equipment to existing subscntres, sherever
HeCeSsary,

A shortage of 1,513 primary Bealth centres (1991), now estimated at
4,212 PHCs for the population projected In 2002. Capital cost of one
PHC Is Bs. 24.50 lacs, with a mocuring liability of RS 12 lacs. These
expenditures are met by the State Gavernments under the basic
minimum services (BMS) programma. However the financial positian
of the State Governments does not enable them to make these
investments in health infrashicbure,

4 shortage of 2,899 community health centres {1391}, now
estimated at 3,776 CHCs For the projected population for the year
2000, CHCs serve, mostly, as the First Referral Units and are critical
for redudng the MMA and IMR, besides Serving 43 operating theatres
for family planning services. Capital cost of one CHE Is Bs. 80.5 facs,
with a recurring [iabiliby of 27 [aes, currently met by Stabe
Governments underthe BMS programme.

The Geparoment of Farnily Welfare funds 5,435 Rural Fv! Centres,
some of which are belng used as First Referral Units. Others are
functioning a5 blactk-[owel PFCs.

AC
Suboenkres Cap
Rec
FHCs Cap
Ried

CHI Cap
Rec

TOTAL Capital
Recurring



rn)

TH@ ic lige hap Gets

Shortage In manpower is estimated as 27,501 ANMs, 64,260 male
iutl-purpose workers, and 4,224 LHVs, 5,126 Health 4ssistants
(malo), 2.475 medical officers In PHCs, 1,429 surgeons, 1,446
gynaecolagish:, 1,525 physicians, 1,774 pediatioans, and an overall
shortage of 6,645 specialists,

Other health manpower reflects a shortfall of 1,171 radiograpaers,
6,045 pharmacists, 12,793 Lab Techniclans, and 16,851 nuse mid=
wives, in Che qural primary health care delivery system. The Financial
requirement to address these unmct needs far trained manpower is
approximately Rs. 2,400 crores,

for safe abortion services, no MTP kits have been made available
since 1497. However, during the CSSM programe, 1,748 MTP kits
were distributed ta the FRUS. Mast of these are lylng unused, on
account of shortage of tralned manpower. This year an additional 180
MTP sebs are belng procured.

For training, since the population polley emphasises convergence of
training requirements 2s well as decentralisation to sub-district and
village levels, the estimaked additionallty for the present ls Rs. 10
crores,



~

™

rs

wat

ye
