

N AT I O N A L
YO U T H
P O L I C Y
2014

TABLE OF CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 03
09
IMPORTANCE OF YOUTH
13
YOUTH RELATED EFFORTS IN INDIA
19
VISION, OBJECTIVES AND PRIORITY
AREAS OF NYP-2014
25
CURRENT POLICIES AND FUTURE IMPERATIVES
25
Education
Employment and Skill Development 30
Entrepreneurship 36
41
Health and Healthy Lifestyle
Sports 46
Promotion of Social Values 50
Community Engagement 54
Participation in Politics and Governance 58
Youth Engagement 62
Inclusion 66
Social Justice
72
MONITORING, EVALUATION AND REVIEW 75
RECOMMENDATIONS ON THE WAY FORWARD 81
LIST OF ACRONYMS 86

6 1

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
1. India lies on the cusp of a demographic transition, similar
to the one that fuelled the spectacular rise in GDP of the
East Asian Tigers in the second half of the 20th century.
However, in order to capture this demographic dividend,
it is essential that the economy has the ability to support
the increase in the labour force and the youth have the
appropriate education, skills, health awareness and other
enablers to productively contribute to the economy.
2. Youth in the age group of 15-29 years comprise 27.5%
of the population. At present, about 34% of India’s Gross
National Income (GNI) is contributed by the youth, aged
15-29 years. However, there exists a huge potential to
increase the contribution of this class of the nation’s
citizenry by increasing their labour force participation and
their productivity.
3. The Government of India (GoI) currently1 invests more
than Rs 90,000 Crores per annum on youth development
programmes or approximately Rs 2,710 per young individual
per year, through youth-targeted (higher education, skill
development, healthcare etc.) and non-targeted (food
subsidies, employment etc.) programmes. In addition, the
State Governments and a number of other stakeholders
are also working to support youth development and to
enable productive youth participation. However, individual
organisations in non-Government sector are small and
fragmented, and there is little coordination between the
various stakeholders working on youth issues.
1
SOURCE: UNION BUDGET, 2011-12 3

EXHIBIT E.1 VISION, OBJECTIVES AND PRIORITY AREAS OF NYP-2014
Create a productive workforce
Education
Entrepreneurship
4. The National Youth Policy, 2014 (NYP-2014) seeks
Emplyoment & Skill Development
to define the Vision of the Government of India for
the Youth of the Country and identify the key areas in
which action is required, where not enough is being
done, to enable youth development and to provide Develop a strong and healthy generation
a framework for action for all stakeholders. It is Health and Healthy Lifestyle
intended to serve as a guiding document, and should TO EMPOWER Sports
be reviewed in 5 years, so that GoI may re-focus its
YOUTH OF THE
priorities for youth development, as may be necessary.
COUNTRY TO
ACHIEVE THEIR
5. NYP-2014 provides a holistic Vision for the youth Instill social values & promote community service
FULL POTENTIAL,
of India which is “to empower the youth of the
Promotion of Social Values
AND THROUGH
country to achieve their full potential, and through
Community Engagement
THEM ENABLE
them enable India to find its rightful place in the
INDIA TO FIND ITS
community of nations”. In order to achieve this
RIGHTFUL PLACE IN
Vision, all stakeholders must work towards meeting 5
THE COMMUNITY
key objectives. This requires specific action in one or
OF NATIONS
more of 11 priority areas, identified as important for
Facilitate participation and civic engagement
youth development. The following Exhibit summarises
Participation in Politics & Governance
the Vision, the objectives and the priority areas of
Youth Engagement
NYP-2014. It also lists the enablers available to achieve
these objectives.
6. The Policy seeks to recommend specific future policy Support youth at risk & create equtable opportunity for all
interventions required in each of the 11 priority areas. Inclusion
These are summarised in Exhibit E.2. Social Justice
4 5

EXHIBIT E.2: OBJECTIVES, PRIORITY AREAS AND FUTURE IMPERATIVES OF NYP 2014
7. In order to work towards closing the gaps identified
OBJECTIVE PRIORITY FUTURE IMPERATIVES in the 11 priority areas of action, it is imperative to have
a concerted effort from all stakeholders. A stakeholder
1. Create a Education • Build system capacity and quality
productive • Promote skill development and lifelong learning map must be drawn up and stakeholder roles and
workforce that responsibilities should be identified. The government
can make a Employment and • Targeted youth outreach and awareness
must increase its investment in youth in order to capitalise
sustainable Skill Development • Build linkages across systems and stakeholders
on the opportunity they present. For this, all government
contribution to
• Define role of government vis-a-vis other stakeholders
India’s economic departments must make a determined effort to ensure
development Entrepreneurship • Targeted youth outreach programmes youth mainstreaming across sectors and policy areas.
• Scale-up effective programmes to build capacity
There are several tools that can be leveraged in order
• Create customised programmes for youth entrepreneurs
to promote youth development, including social media
• Implement widespread monitoring & evaluation systems
which enjoys high penetration amongst the youth, and
• Improve service delivery
2. Develop a Health and
the network of existing youth development organisations.
• Awareness about health, nutrition and preventive care
strong and healthy Healthy Lifestyle
• Targeted disease control programmes for youth
generation equipped
to take on future 8. In addition, it is important to monitor and evaluate
• Increase access to sports facilities and training
Sports
challenges • Promotion of sports culture among youth the success of NYP-2014. A set of leading and lagging
• Support and development for talented sports persons
indicators have been identified. A baseline assessment
Promotion of • Formalise values education system must be undertaken across these indicators, annual targets
3. Instil social
Social Values • Strengthen engagement programmes for youth
values and promote must be set and progress against these targets monitored.
• Support NGOs and for-profit organisations working
community service
towards spreading values and harmony The Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports should publish
to build national
a Biennial Report on the status of the youth in order
ownership Community • Leverage existing community development organisations
to inform the Nation about progress against indicators,
Engagement • Promote social entrepreneurship
highlight key achievements and identify new and unmet
4. Facilitate Participation • Engage youth outside of the political system
challenges. The report shall also serve the purpose
participation and civic in politics and • Create governance mechanisms that youth can leverage
engagement at all governance • Promote youth engagement in urban governance of informing the youth of the country about various
levels of governance
government initiatives for the development of the youth.
• Measure and monitor effectiveness of youth
Youth
development schemes
engagement
9. All through history, youth have been the harbingers
• Create a platform for engagement with youth
of change – from winning independence for nations, to
5. Support youth Inclusion • Enablement & capability building for disadvantaged youth
creating new technologies that upset the status quo,
at risk and create • Ensuring economic opportunities for youth in
equitable opportunity conflict-affected regions to new forms of art, music and culture. Supporting and
for all disadvantaged • Develop a multi-pronged approach to supporting promoting the development of India’s youth must be
& marginalised youth youth with disability
one of the foremost priorities, across all sectors and
• Create awareness and opportunities to prevent youth
being put at risk stakeholders, of this nation.
Social Justice • Leveraging youth to eliminate unjust social practices
• Strengthen access to justice at all levels
6 7

IMPORTANCE OF YOUTH
Definition of the ‘Youth’
1.1 Youth is a more fluid category than a fixed
age-group. ‘Youth’ is often indicated as a person
between the age where he/she leaves compulsory
education, and the age at which he/she finds his/
her first employment. Often, Youth age-group
is defined differently by different countries/
agencies and by same agency in different
contexts. United Nations defines ‘youth’ as
persons between 15 and 24 years of age2 .
1.2 In the National Youth Policy-2003, ‘youth’
was defined a person of age between 13-35
years, but in the current Policy Document, the
youth age-group is defined as 15-29 years with a
view to have a more focused approach, as far as
various policy interventions are concerned.
1.3 However, it needs to be recognised that all
young persons within this age-group are unlikely
to be a homogeneous group. Different segments
of the Youth would have different needs and
concerns, which need to be addressed.
2HTTP://WWW.UNESCO.ORG/NEW/EN/SOCIAL-AND-HUMAN-SCIENCES/THEMES/YOUTH/YOUTH-DEFINITION/ ;
8 ACCESSED 1 JULY 2013 9

Working
EXHIBIT E.3 INDIA TO HAVE A VERYCHINA INDIA Population in
(1,321 million/1,383 million) (1,153 million/1,334 million) 20201 (million)
FAVOURABLE DEMOGRAPHIC PROFILE
EXHIBIT E.3 INDIA TO HAVE 80+Age 80+Age
A VERY FAVOURABLE 70 70 INDIA: 592
60 60
DEMOGRAPHIC PROFILE
50 50 China: 776
40 42.0 40
30 37.6 30 Japan: 60
20 20 28.1
10 10 24.4 US: 164
0 0
2008 2020 2008 2020
JAPAN UNITED STATES Country
The Demographic Dividend (128 million/123 million) (304 million/330 million) Population(2008/
2020)
80+Age 80+Age
70 70
60 60
1.4 INDIA STANDS TO BENEFIT FROM ITS 50 50
44.2 48.6 Working
FAVOURABLE DEMOGRAPHIC PROFILE: 40 40 population
38.0
30 30 36.8 in millions
by age
20 20
Youth in the age group of 15-29 years comprise 27.5%
10 10
of the population3. India is expected to become the 0 0 ––––––median age
2008 2020 2008 2020
4th largest economy by 2025, contributing about Working
1. Working population includes only economically active population
5.5%-6% to the world GDP, only after the United CHINA Sources: National statistical institutes I ; N BC D G a I n A alysis. Population in
(1,321 million/1,383 million) (1,153 million/1,334 million) 20201 (million)
States, China and Japan4 . While most of these
80+Age 80+Age
countries face the risk of an ageing workforce, India
70 70
INDIA: 592
is expected to have a very favourable demographic 60 60
50 50 China: 776
profile, as shown in Exhibit 1.3. The population
40 42.0 40
of India is expected to exceed 1.3 billion by 2020 30 37.6 30 Japan: 60
20 20 28.1
with a median age of 28 which is considerably less
10 10 24.4 US: 164
than the expected median ages of China and Japan. 0 0
2008 2020 2008 2020
The working population of India, is expected to
JAPAN UNITED STATES Country
increase to 592 million by 2020, next only to China
(128 million/123 million) (304 million/330 million) Population(2008/
(776 million), pointing to the fact that youth will 2020)
80+Age 80+Age
make a significant contribution to the economic 70 70
development of the country. This ‘demographic 60 60
50 50
dividend’ offers a great opportunity to India. 40 44.2 48.6 40 p W op o u rk la i t n io g n
38.0
30 30 36.8 in millions
by age
20 1. Working population includes 20
10 only economically active population 10
0 Sources: National statistical institutes; 0 ––––––median age
B2C0G0 8analysis. 2020 2008 2020
33DDAATTAA AASS PPEERR CCEENNSSUUSS 22001111.. DDAATTAA AAVVAAIILLAABBLLEE FFOORR 55 YYEEAARR CCOOHHOORRTTSS SSTTAARRTTIINNGG AAGGEE GGRROOUUPP 00 TTOO 44.. 1 S . o W ur o c r e k s i : n N g a p t o io p n u a la l t s io ta n t i i s n t c ic lu a d l i e n s s o tit n u ly te e s c ; B on C o G m a ic n a a ll l y y s a i c s t . ive population
10 441122TTHH FFIIVVEE YYEEAARR PPLLAANN VVOOLLUUMMEE 11 11

YOUTH RELATED
EFFORTS IN INDIA
2.1 GOI CURRENTLY INVESTS IN YOUTH
THROUGH A WIDE RANGE OF PROGRAMMES:
GoI spends a considerable amount of money on
youth development through Ministries that have
schemes targeted at the youth and schemes that
target the general population of the country.
GoI spends about Rs.37,000 crores on schemes
targeted at development of youth in areas
of education, health, skill development and
engagement and about Rs.55,000 crores on
non-targeted schemes designed for various
demographic segments of which youth are
significant beneficiaries. Together, this totals a
spend of more than Rs.90,000 crores (Exhibit E.4)5 .
5SOURCE: UNION BUDGET, 2011-12.
12 13

EXHIBIT E.4 GOI TARGETED AND NON-TARGETED
EXPENDITURE ON YOUTH
• Of the targeted expenditure of Rs.37,000 Crores, more than
80% of the funds are allocated towards education through
120 EXPENDITURE IN FY12 (RS '000 CR)
the Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD)
and Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment (MoSJE).
The expenditure is primarily through grants to various 90
government schools and universities and direct cash benefits 37
to students in the form of scholarships and fellowships for
60
both secondary and higher education. Further, there are
92
programmes targeting youth in the areas of skill development,
30
55
employment, health and engagement.
0
• Of the non-targeted spend, food subsidies, employment
Total Targeted expenditure Non-targeted expenditure
programmes like MGNREGA, health programmes related
2,710 1,100 1,610
to infrastructure development, disease control and family
welfare constitute a significant share. Other Ministries with PER CAPITA EXPENDITURE (RS PER YOUTH)
schemes providing direct benefit to youth through some of
EXPENDITURE ON YOUTH SPLIT BY TARGETED VS APPORTIONED EXPENDITURE
their schemes are Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation,
Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Labour and Employment
(MLE), Ministry of Tribal Affairs (MoTA) and Ministry of Rural
Development (MoRD). Over 80% of expenditure accounted by Key departments with
• Education (secondary and higher) general schemes:
• Food subsidies
This totals a per capita spending on youth of about Rs 2,710 • Food & Public Distribution
• Employment programs
of which Rs 1,100 is targeted spending as shown in Exhibit E.4. • Rural Development
• Health and Family Welfare
• Agricultural Co-operation
Most targeted spend done on education
through MoHRD (various programs) and
MoSJE (scholarships)
Note: Ministry of Fertilizers not considered in analysis (Fertilizer subsidies for farmers).
Source: Union Budget 2011-12, BCG analysis
14 15

2.2 STATE GOVERNMENTS ALSO INVEST IN YOUTH 2.5 FRAMEWORK FOR COORDINATED ACTION ON
THROUGH A WIDE RANGE OF PROGRAMMES. YOUTH ISSUES NEEDED.
Bulk of the targeted expenditure on youth is on education, A key challenge is that there has been no systematic
health and youth services. The State Governments incur assessment to understand the current status of the youth
substantial expenditure on these heads, over and above segment, the challenges they face and the inter-linkages
the expenditure being incurred by the Government of between these areas. Furthermore, there has been no
India. Thus, the aggregate expenditure on youth (Central concerted effort to identify the range of stakeholders
and State Governments combined) would be much higher. working on youth development, analyse the impact of their
activities and determine how these stakeholders can be
2.3 NON-GOVERNMENTAL STAKEHOLDERS ARE aligned & leveraged to more effectively support the youth.
SMALL AND FRAGMENTED.
In addition to the government, there are a range 2.6 A HOLISTIC ASSESSMENT OF THE CHALLENGES
of stakeholders working on youth related issues. FACING THE YOUTH IS REQUIRED.
hese include civil society organisations, corporates and A stakeholder mapping exercise must be undertaken to
industry associations. These stakeholders have two determine the number of stakeholders, the scope of their
objectives; the first is to promote youth development activities and the impact they have on youth development
through programmes on education, skill development, and engagement. Finally, an overarching framework needs
health care, sports etc. The second is to facilitate youth to be developed in order to align stakeholders and to
participation and engagement on issues such as community provide guidance on key issues.
development, politics, governance etc.
2.4 WHILE THERE ARE MULTIPLE STAKEHOLDERS
WORKING ON YOUTH RELATED ISSUES, THE SIZE OF
THESE ORGANISATIONS IS OFTEN SMALL.
Furthermore, they are fragmented with respect to the issues
they address, the regions they operate in and the youth
segments they target. Stakeholders often work with little
coordination and no overarching objective or framework.
16 17

VISION, OBJECTIVES
AND PRIORITY AREAS
OF NYP-2014
The National Youth Policy (NYP-2014) aims at providing
an overview of the state of the youth aged 15-29 years
in India. It highlights key issues and challenges faced
by the youth and elaborates on how all stakeholders
can support the youth to ensure that they contribute
positively to the development of the society, now and
in the future.
Vision
NYP-2014 provides a holistic Vision for the youth of
India which is:
“To empower youth of the country to
achieve their full potential, and through
them enable India to find its rightful place
in the community of nations”.
18 19

DEVELOP A STRONG AND HEALTHY GENERATION
Objectives
EQUIPPED TO TAKE ON FUTURE CHALLENGES
Achieving this Vision requires the Government and
In order to create a generation of young Indians
all stakeholders to work towards five clearly defined
equipped to take on future challenges and achieve
objectives which are as follows:
their full potential, it is necessary that the youth are in
good health and make healthy and balanced lifestyle
CREATE A PRODUCTIVE WORKFORCE THAT CAN choices. Youth specific health issues must be addressed
MAKE A SUSTAINABLE CONTRIBUTION TO INDIA’S through targeted programmes. Balanced nutrition and
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT healthy lifestyle information must be provided to the
youth. Youth must also be encouraged to engage in
In order to create a productive youth workforce, it is
sports and recreation in order to ensure their physical
essential that the youth of the country have access to the
well-being.
right set of tools and opportunities to make a sustainable
contribution. The youth must have equitable access
to high quality education and be able to develop the INSTIL SOCIAL VALUES AND PROMOTE
necessary skills that are required by the labour market COMMUNITY SERVICE TO STRENGTHEN
to ensure that they are gainfully employed. Given that NATIONALISM IN THE COUNTRY
a large proportion of the workforce is self-employed,
It is important to build national pride and ownership in
entrepreneurship must be encouraged amongst the
the youth through a programme of education on social
youth and they must be supported through the process
values including respect for diversity and the importance
of idea generation, incubation and financing.
of harmony. Youth must be encouraged to participate
in community service and development activities,
especially in the most backward regions. The youth of
India must have a strong sense of moral responsibility
towards their fellow citizens, especially those that are
less fortunate than themselves. Youth of the country
must be encouraged to fulfil their duties as citizens and
thus create an environment in which all citizens enjoy
the rights guaranteed in our Constitution.
21

FACILITATE PARTICIPATION AND CIVIC ENGAGEMENT Priority Areas
AT ALL LEVELS OF GOVERNANCE
Achieving each of these five objectives requires action in a set of
Governance requires an active citizenry, and given that the key priority areas. The following table lists the 11 key priority areas
youth in the age group of 15-29 years comprise 27.5% of the where action is required to meet the five stated objectives:
population, it is essential to create mechanisms for youth
participation in politics and governance. Youth are the future EXHIBIT E.5: OBJECTIVES AND PRIORITY AREAS OF NYP 2014
of the nation and must be encouraged to participate in politics
at local and national levels. They must be provided the necessary
OBJECTIV ES PRIORITY AR EAS
training and tools to become effective policy makers and to be
1. Create a productive workforce that can 1. Education
able to execute government’s schemes and programmes.
make a sustainable contribution to
2. Employment and Skill development
India’s economic development
3. Entrepreneurship
SUPPORT YOUTH AT RISK AND CREATE EQUITABLE
OPPORTUNITY FOR ALL DISADVANTAGED AND 2. Develop a strong and healthy generation 4. Health and healthy lifestyle
equipped to take on future challenges
MARGINALISED YOUTH 5. Sports
A few segments of the youth population require special 3. Instil social values and promote 6. Promotion of social values
community service to build national
attention. These include economically backward youth, 7. Community engagement
ownership
women, youth with disabilities, youth living in conflict
4. Facilitate participation and civic 8. Participation in politics and governance
affected regions including left wing extremism, and youth at
engagement at levels of governance
9. Youth engagement
risk due to substance abuse, human trafficking or hazardous
working conditions. It is essential that government policies are 5. Support youth at risk and create equitable 10. Inclusion
opportuni ty for all disadvantaged and
inclusive and provide equitable opportunities to all. It is also 11. Social justice
marginalised youth
important to ensure these youth do not suffer from stigma or
discrimination, and have equitable access to justice to ensure a
dignified life to all segments amongst the youth.
22 23

v
CURRENT POLICIES AND
FUTURE IMPERATIVES
4.1 Priority Area 1: Education
4.1.1 CURRENT STATUS:
In order to create a productive youth
workforce that contributes to economic
development, the youth must be educated
and equipped with the necessary skill-set
to forge sustainable livelihoods. The youth
are not a homogeneous group and their
education needs vary. For example, the out-
of-school (OoS) and school drop-outs cannot
be addressed by one set of policies since youth
that wish to but cannot enrol in school are
different from drop-outs that are looking to
join the labour market. Therefore, different
segments of the youth need tailored and
targeted policies.
25

However, challenges to youth education remain. The 12th Plan
Additionally, there are cross-cutting youth groups like
identifies strategic shifts in education policy that will further
disabled youth, women, minorities etc. that need special
youth development. These include an increased focus on the
policies that will enable them to equitably access and benefit
upward transition of students from elementary to secondary
from the education system. Recognising the importance of
education where there is a significant bottleneck, building
education for youth and the heterogeneity of youth, a lot of
a system that supports lifelong learning, vocationalising
emphasis has been placed by the government on reforming
education and promoting skill development.
the education system and devising appropriate policies for
the various youth segments.
4.1.2 FUTURE IMPERATIVES
GoI has implemented several policies aimed at universalising
Going forward, two key priorities to promote youth education
access, creating equity and improving quality of education.
must be (i) to build capacity and quality in the system and (ii)
Schemes are aimed at promoting inclusive education, expanding
to promote skill development and lifelong learning.
the capacity of technical and higher education, enhancing
literacy and basic education, building a cadre of trained teachers
Build capacity and quality in the system:
etc6. There has also been significant focus on curriculum
The 12th Plan priorities for secondary and higher education
reform, regulation and improving quality of higher education
can be summarised as (a) increasing access, (b) ensuring
to ensure that the graduates from the system are employable.
equity, (c) improving the quality of inputs and outcomes, and
The Department of Higher Education has conceptualised a new
(d) promoting greater governance and accountability.
scheme, namely, Rashtriya Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan (RUSA)
which seeks to address the issues of quality, access and inclusion
• Capacity improvements must be made in both secondary
through a Mission Mode scheme for the higher education sector.
and higher education to support increased access and equity.
Further, educational loans are being provided from the Banking
These include physical infrastructure improvements, expanded
system to meritorious students for pursing higher education.
reach to regions with lower education enrolments and
Ministry of Human Resource Development also provides interest
outcomes as well as enhanced teacher selection and recruitment
subsidy on educational loans to students from economically
programmes. The Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan
weaker sections.
(RMSA) is being developed into an umbrella programme
for secondary education, subsuming smaller schemes7.
In addition to the government, civil society organisations and
A monitoring and evaluation system must be built into RMSA to
the private sector have been directly delivering education,
ensure that the objectives of existing schemes are not diluted
providing financial support to students, evaluating government
or lost and that youth from disadvantaged groups and regions
policies and promoting accountability in the system.
are effectively mainstreamed. Similarly, expansion of capacity
These concerted efforts of the government, civil society and
in existing higher education institutions must be monitored
the private sector have seen positive benefits, including rising
closely to ensure that the quality is not compromised.
GERs in secondary and higher education.
6A COMPLETE LIST OF POLICIES FOR SECONDARY, HIGHER, TECHNICAL AND ADULT EDUCATION CAN BE FOUND ON
26 THE MHRD WEBSITE HTTP://MHRD.GOV.IN/SCHEMES_HOME OTHER MINISTRIES SUCH AS MOSJE AND MOTA ALSO 27
HAVE TARGETED SCHEMES SUCH AS SCHOLARSHIP PROGRAMMES FOR CERTAIN PRIORITY YOUTH GROUPS.

• A number of quality improvement programmes have Promote skill development and lifelong learning:
been implemented to improve student outcomes. This is essential in order to ensure that the education
These include the teacher training programme and system produces qualified individuals who are able to
certification, curriculum improvements, revised build on their skills as per their own developmental needs.
student assessment norms, and accreditation of schools
and colleges. It is essential to review the success of • A critical mechanism to promote skill development
existing quality improvement programmes, to revise and lifelong learning is to build inter-linkages between
strategies that have proved ineffective and to scale- systems such as formal education, vocational training,
up successful programmes. skilling programmes, literacy and basic education
programmes. It is important to develop a standardised
• It is important to clearly define the role of government qualifications frameworks like the National Skill
vis-a-vis private sector in the delivery of education. Qualification Framework (NSQF) and tools to
New PPP models can be explored and appropriate translate qualifications between different education
regulation systems, accreditation procedures, policies and skilling programmes. This also requires improved
and incentives must be developed to enable private student certification and accreditation mechanisms
education providers to take on the challenge of that verify institutions. This will enable individuals to
expanding and improving secondary education. transition between learning systems, building skills
and acquiring qualifications most suitable to their
• Mechanisms for financing both secondary and higher own development and employer needs.
education must be developed. Several options are
available such as universalising free education or free • There are several plans for increasing the flexibility
education for certain students, with resources raised by of the education system and introducing new types of
government through taxation. Other options include education offerings such as community college degrees,
direct demand side financing through subsidies and vocational training credits that can be transferred to
need-based scholarships to students or low-cost higher education institutions etc. However, there is
education loans. Pilot projects must be undertaken and no overarching policy or coordinating framework to
evaluated in order to determine the most appropriate govern education for youth aged 15-24 years. This must
mechanisms for financing education. be developed in order to ensure that the objectives
are clearly defined and should emphasise governance,
accountability and transparency of the system.
28 29

2013, the NCSD, the NSDCB, and the Office of the Adviser
to Prime Minister on Skill Development have now been
4.2 Priority Area 2: Employment and subsumed in NSDA. NSDA is an autonomous body which
Skill Development will coordinate and harmonize the skill development
efforts of the Government and the private sector to
achieve the skilling targets of the 12th Plan and beyond
4.2.1 CURRENT STATUS:
and endeavour to bridge the social, regional, gender
Youth must develop skills that are relevant to
and economic divide in skilling.
employment needs, in order to ensure employability and
to prevent labour demand-supply mismatches. This can
Ministry of Labour and Employment has taken a
be achieved by measures such as quality improvements in
number of initiatives in the field of skill development
formal education, vocational education, specialised skills
and employment. For instance, training of trainers
training and by ensuring sufficient income-generation
is being conducted by Advanced Training Institutes
opportunities commensurate to their skills. Also, the
and Regional Vocational Training Institutes run by
National Occupation Standards need to be defined and
the Ministry. The Ministry has also set up a standard
the training and skill development programmes need
system of assessment and certification of vocational
to be aligned to such standards. In order to promote
training and industries are being involved in curriculum
employment of youth, GoI has taken a two-pronged
design. The National Employment Service run through
approach, namely, (i) enabling skill development and
network of employment exchanges is being modernised
(ii) implementing direct employment programmes for
and being converted into National Career Service and
lower skilled individuals.
the apprenticeship regime is also being significantly
improved. In addition, the Ministry is also bringing out
The Government of India has adopted skill development
a National Employment Policy.
as a national priority. In order to create an institutional
base for skill development in India at the national level,
Similarly, the Ministry of Rural Development also runs
a three-tier institutional structure, consisting of the
a Scheme called Himayat, under which 3 months’ skill
PM’s National Council on Skill Development (NCSD), the
training is imparted to the youth in Jammu & Kashmir
National Skill Development Coordination Board (NSDCB)
in sectors where there is high employer demand,
and the National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC),
followed by job placement and post-placement support.
was created in early 2008. In 2009, GoI launched the
The NRLM programme of MoRD also places emphasis
National Skill Development Policy (NSDP) with a target
on imparting necessary skills for rural self-employment.
for skilling 500 million people by 2020. With the creation
Further, the Indian Banks’ Association has formulated a
of National Skill Development Agency (NSDA) in June,
30 31

a) Targeted youth outreach & awareness
Model Educational Loan Scheme for Vocational Courses,
programmes:
under which loans are provided for undergoing vocational
training courses. NSDP’s youth and user-centric approach must be
embedded in all activities that fall under the aegis of skill
GoI has also instituted direct employment schemes in rural development.
areas where there are limited opportunities for youth.
MGNREGA, a flagship scheme of Government of India, • Targeted information must be made available to the
provides 100 days of guaranteed employment to all rural youth about the various skill development and training
households willing to work on labour-intensive projects. options available to them. Information on the quality
A key challenge is to enable training of low skilled of institutions, for example, post-programme placement
individuals and to incentivise employers to recruit in EBRs, scorecards, curriculum benchmarking etc. is required and
LWE affected regions, J&K and North East. youth need guidance on the benefits of skill development
training. Youth must have access to data on their post-
programme employment options8 . Youth must be made
4.2.2 FUTURE IMPERATIVES aware of the different financial support packages available
The 12th Plan lists future priorities for strengthening the such as low-cost loans, post-programme employment-
skill development system. These include promoting PPPs, linked payment options etc.
implementing the National Skills Qualifications Framework
(NSQF), strengthening the institutional structure, • It is important to identify the most appropriate
increasing regional equity and access and improving the engagement mechanisms for information provision to the
apprenticeship programme. There are three critical areas youth. The effectiveness of the youth outreach programmes
that need to be prioritised, which are (a) ensuring youth must be monitored, and strategies should be adapted, as
can benefit from skill development opportunities, (b) required, in order to ensure sustained benefits.
clearly defining stakeholder roles, and (c) building inter-
linkages between systems and stakeholders.
8 12TH PLAN RECOMMENDS THE SETTING UP OF A LABOUR MARKET INFORMATION SYSTEM PLATFORM FOR REAL TIME
32 33
INFORMATION ON A SECTORAL BASIS TO HELP TRAINEES SELECT THE MOST APPROPRIATE TRAINING PROGRAMMES

c) Define role of government vis-a-vis other
b) Build linkages across systems and stakeholders:
stakeholders:
Given the integration of skill development with the
Given the scale of the skill development and employment
education system as well as the job market, it is essential
needs of the youth, non-governmental stakeholders must
to build linkages across systems and stakeholders.
be brought into the purview of all policies. Clear roles
must be defined for all stakeholders, in order to ensure
• Linkages must be developed between training
that the identified gaps are being closed.
institutions and employers. Employers must provide inputs
into the training curriculum in order to ensure relevance
• With respect to financing, there is no doubt that the
of youth skills to labour market needs. Similarly, training
skill development eco-system needs financing support
institutions must tie-up with employers to create post-
from the government as well as the private sector. The
programme placement opportunities for students.
government should directly fund institutions or students
and should also create an enabling environment for
• Linkages must be developed between the education
private financing and the development of innovative
system and skills institutes to enable OoS individuals to
student credit packages.
develop job-ready skills, and return to formal education
at a later date should they choose. This will be possible
• On the delivery side, the government should determine
by implementing the NSQF and creating a system of
where its money would be most effectively spent. Options
equivalence to university degrees and diplomas.
include investments in capacity expansion through
upgradation of Industrial Training Institutes (ITIs) or
• Linkages must be built between Sectoral Skill Councils,
investments in programmes that train the trainer, & leave
employers and training institutes. This will enable the
the actual delivery of skills training to the private sector.
creation of a dynamic & forward looking process for
defining occupational standards, setting up institutes in
While making the above interventions, there is need
areas of employer need & placement of trained youth
to place due emphasis on special requirements for skill
into jobs.
development and employment of women. Empowerment
of women youth is critical aspect of the overall youth
empowerment. Similar attention needs to be given to
special needs for skill development and employment of
other disadvantaged sections of the youth.
34 35

4.3 Priority Area 3: Entrepreneurship
4.3.1 CURRENT STATUS
Promoting entrepreneurship is essential in order to through the process of idea incubation, business plan
enable youth to productively contribute to India’s generation, credit sourcing and execution. Further,
economic development. About 50% of the labour force Rural Self-employment Training Institutes (RSETIs) are
is currently self-employed9 , and SMEs employ 70 million playing an important role by providing training for self-
people which is approximately 15% of the labour force. employment.
As the number of skilled individuals increases through
the renewed push for skill development and labour force These GoI schemes have been set up to cover the various
participation grows, the number of entrepreneurs is needs of aspirant entrepreneurs and are important for
likely to increase further. the growth of entrepreneurship in India. They have been
successful at delivering better access to credit, providing
In order to create an environment in which youth basic tools for entrepreneurship to a broader segment of
can generate sustainable self-employment and the population and building private sector involvement in
entrepreneurship opportunities, it is essential that they entrepreneurship creation and promotion. Furthermore,
have access to training, incubator support to develop and as demonstrated by the MEC programme of NRLM,
execute their ideas, & the credit to finance their ventures. the design of these schemes is evolving to respond to
entrepreneurs’ needs for end-to-end support rather
The GoI runs several schemes and programmes to train and than simply providing low-cost credit or short-term
finance entrepreneurs10 . The Prime Minister’s Employment entrepreneurship training. However, an examination of
Generation Programme (PMEGP) administered by the existing schemes reveals that there are a few areas where
Ministry of Small and Medium Enterprises (MoSME) is one they can be strengthened to deliver greater impact.
of the largest credit-linked subsidy schemes. It provides
finance towards the set-up costs of entrepreneurial
ventures in the manufacturing and services sectors. The 4.3.2 FUTURE IMPERATIVES
National Rural Livelihoods Mission (NRLM) of the MoRD
There are four areas where on-going entrepreneurship
runs programmes to promote self-employment in rural
programmes can be strengthened to offer greater
areas, which has significantly enhanced availability of
support to youth entrepreneurs. These are (a)
capital for productive purposes in rural areas. Under the
outreach & information provision, (b) scale & inclusion,
NRLM, a cadre of Micro-Enterprise Consultants (MECs)
(c) programme quality and relevance, and (d) monitoring
is also being trained to support rural entrepreneurs
and evaluation.
9 REPORT ON EMPLOYMENT & UNEMPLOYMENT SURVEY, MINISTRY OF LABOUR & EMPLOYMENT, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
10SEVERAL MINISTRIES PROVIDE TARGETED ENTREPRENEURSHIP PROGRAMMES, INCLUDING MINISTRY OF SMALL AND MEDIUM
36 37
ENTERPRISES, MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT AND MINISTRY OF WOMEN AND CHILD DEVELOPMENT. THE TWO SCHEMES
LISTED HERE ARE INDICATIVE OF THE TYPE OF SUPPORT AVAILABLE TO ASPIRANT ENTREPRENEURS

a) Targeted youth outreach programmes: to areas where there is little or no access currently, in order to
Youth should have information on the various entrepreneurship ensure that youth especially those marginalized due to socio-
schemes that they can participate in, so that they may make the economic factors, disability, gender or other reasons can fully
correct choices. participate in these schemes.
• One way to do so is to create a targeted information programme • Various apprenticeship models must be explored to understand
for youth about various schemes and potential benefits of each. how aspirant youth can be supported by successful entrepreneurs,
A vast cross-country network that can be leveraged to provide and can develop the necessary skills, experience and contacts ‘on
this information is the Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan (NYKS) the job’. Lessons can be learnt from the experience of countries
volunteers. They should be provided brochures and other material for such as Germany, that have been highly successful in this regard.
dissemination of information on the various schemes at the grassroots.
c) Create customised programmes for youth entrepreneurs:
• The PMEGP’s implementation model includes outreach through On-going entrepreneurship training schemes can be reviewed
awareness camps that circulate publicity materials, the type and strengthened. There is also a need to assess the quality and
of projects that can be undertaken, connecting potential relevance to youth of training delivered.
participants with successful entrepreneurs that have graduated
from the program and leveraging NYKS volunteers and other • Entrepreneurs are a non-homogenous group with respect to
grassroots organizations to generate awareness on the benefits of their demographic profile, skills, experience and business ideas.
participation. This must be evaluated to determine whether it is an The need for a review of curriculum and possible customisation
effective model that can be replicated. or development of youth specific training modules is borne
out by a MoRD study which shows that while the average age
b) Scale-up effective programmes to build capacity: of participants in RSETI training is 22, the average age of first
The scale and budgets of the GoI entrepreneurship programmes generation micro-entrepreneurs is 40 years and that older trainees
vary significantly11. It is essential to build sufficient capacity in are settled faster into self-employment.
various entrepreneurship development and training institutes and
• Specialised post-programme support for business planning
ensure that budgetary allocations to entrepreneurship financing
and execution can be introduced for youth participants who lack
schemes are sufficient to meet likely demand.
the confidence, finances and contacts to become entrepreneurs,
in order to enable them to set up businesses successfully. This
• Existing schemes must be reviewed not only to determine
could be institutionalised under NRLM and other programmes
additional capacity needed but also to understand the geographic
for self-employment.
and demographic reach of the schemes. GoI can work with state
governments, civil society and private players to expand schemes
11 MSME RESULTS FRAMEWORK DOCUMENT (RFD) STATES THAT 2009-10 2.9 LAKH PEOPLE WERE TRAINED UNDER
ENTREPRENEURSHIP DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMMES RUN BY MOSME . PMEGP GENERATED EMPLOYMENT FOR 2.67 LAKH
38 39
PEOPLE AND THE RAJIV GANDHI UDYAMI MITRA YOJANA (RGUMY) ASSISTED 4000 FIRST GENERATION ENTREPRENEURS.

4.4 Priority Area 4: Health and Healthy Lifestyle
d) Implement widespread monitoring and
4.4.1 CURRENT STATUS:
evaluation systems: It is essential that schemes
Health is essential to social security and all individuals
have strong monitoring, data collection and
must have access to affordable healthcare facilities.
evaluation mechanisms in order to ensure that they
Inadequate health resources and high out-of-pocket
are achieving their targets and serving the interests
expenditure due to ill health are problems that are
of the cross-section of the population aspiring to
faced by all segments of the population, including
become entrepreneurs.
the youth; and must be resolved. Additionally,
there are a few youth-specific health issues that
• The MSME ‘Scheme of Surveys, Studies and
require a targeted approach. These include (a)
Policy Research’ model can be reviewed and, if
promoting a healthy lifestyle among youth to
proven successful, adopted by other Ministries,
combat non-communicable diseases attributable
drawing on appropriate support from the Planning
to lifestyle disorders like obesity, cardio-vascular
Commission’s Programme Evaluation Organisation
diseases, diabetes, stroke, chronic lung diseases,
(PEO) and Independent Evaluation Office (IEO).
cancer, etc. which have been increasingly affecting
young adults, (b) creating awareness about family
planning, birth control, STDs, HIV/AIDS and
substance abuse, especially in rural areas and (c)
addressing issues concerning emotional and mental
health (e.g. risk of depression and potential suicide
attempts), esp. in case of adolescent youth.
40 41

• Access to medical training and education has
Given the need to significantly improve the health care
increased with the setting up of 6 AIIMS-like institutes
system, funding to the Ministry of Health and Family
and upgradation of 13 medical colleges under Pradhan
Welfare (MoHFW) has trebled under the 12th Five Year
Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana (PMSSY) scheme. 72
Plan. The 12th Plan seeks to extend the outreach of public
State Government medical colleges have also been
health services for moving towards the goal of Universal
strengthened.
Health Coverage (UHC) through National Health Mission.
In this context, various initiatives have been taken by
Despite these and other programmes undertaken by
MoHFW, Ministry of Women and Child Development
MoHFW, there are disparities in attainments across
(MoWCD), private sector groups and NGOs.
various health indicators and several unmet targets.
Improvements in the delivery systems are required at
Key achievements include:
all levels.
• The Maternal Mortality Rate (MMR) has improved during
the 11th Five Year Plan, primarily due to the success of
4.4.2 FUTURE IMPERATIVES
schemes like Janani Suraksha Yojana (JSY), Accredited
a) Improved service delivery: In order to achieve
Social Health Activists (ASHAs) and Reproductive and
the goal of providing UHC, it is imperative to first have
Child Health Programme with support from National Rural
basic healthcare facilities in place.
Health Mission (NRHM) in rural areas.
• Adequate healthcare access must be created for
• India has achieved major success in terms of elimination
individuals across the country, especially pregnant
of Polio.
and lactating mothers. This requires a review of the
efficiency of primary health care (PHC) facilities and
• Disease control measures have led to a reduction in the
course correction mechanisms to be implemented
incidence of HIV/AIDS infections in the country by 57%.
where existing strategies are proven to be ineffective.
• The National TB Control Programme has been able to
• It is essential to create a large trained pool of
achieve its targets of a 70% case detection rate and 85%
doctors, nurses and health workers through expansion
treatment success rate.
of medical colleges and training institutes. They must
be incentivised to serve in remote areas, in order to
• Regarding non-communicable diseases, screening for
promote equity in the system. Anganwadi Centres
Diabetes and Hypertension has been initiated under the
need to be developed as hub in rural areas to provide
National Programme for Prevention and Control of Cancer,
training to Anganwadi Workers (AWWs), ASHAs and
Diabetes, CVDs and Strokes.
other health activists.
42 43

Active participation of the private sector in setting up In this regard, the existing hospitals, PHC facilities,
training centres, colleges and research institutes can anganwadi centres and NGOs can also contribute
provide support to the over-burdened government significantly through their extensive reach in rural
resources and machinery. and inaccessible areas. In creating such awareness,
progressive adolescents (as under the Saksham scheme)
• There is a need to pay special attention to health and youth volunteers under NSS and NYKS can also play
issues concerning women youth. This would entail very effective role.
greater pre-natal and post-natal care for women in
vulnerable age group of 14-18 years, need to bring
down maternal and infant mortality rates, campaign c) Targeted disease control programmes
against female feticide to improve child sex ratio, etc. for youth:
Youth are at risk of contracting HIV/ AIDS and TB due to
b) Targeted awareness programmes for youth: lack of information and poor access to preventive care.
Apart from increasing access to health care facilities, This can be addressed by developing robust awareness
targeted awareness programmes on specific health and treatment programs especially in rural areas.
issues must be implemented. The youth must be The NRHM, NACP and on-going NGO programmes
educated about nutrition choices and leading a healthy can be leveraged to expand disease detection, control
lifestyle. The youth must be made aware of the benefits and awareness programmes. Enhanced capacity for
of preventive healthcare. detection and treatment of communicable diseases
There is also need to create awareness among the youth must be developed, especially for pregnant mothers
about ill-effects of drug/ substance abuse. Inclusion of and other high risk groups.
health and nutrition in the curriculum of schools and
colleges will help further this goal.
44 45

sector companies and NGOs. These organisations largely
4.5 Priority Area 5: Sports
focus on promoting a sporting culture and providing
access to sports infrastructure, coaching and training to
youth. Some significant initiatives are:
4.5.1 CURRENT STATUS
Sports and recreational activities form an essential • Broad basing of sports: The government is working
component of the growth and development of a towards broad basing sports by providing access to
young individual. Sports activities promote physical, sports facilities and coaching in both urban and rural
mental and emotional growth. They help support a areas. This is done through programmes like Panchayat
healthy lifestyle and ensure the youth are engaged Yuva Krida aur Khel Abhiyan (PYKKA) [being recast as
and productive. Participation in sports can inculcate Rajiv Gandhi Khel Abhiyan (RGKA)], National Playing
the spirit of competitiveness and teamwork which Fields Association of India (NPFAI) and the Scheme
helps in the holistic development of the youth. Sports for creation of urban infrastructure at various levels.
is increasingly being considered a viable professional The RTE Act also mandates access to playgrounds and
option. Representing the country in international recreational facilities in all schools. Organisations
sporting events fosters national pride and helps like Sports Authority of India (SAI), national sports
inculcate a feeling of national unity and belonging federations and state level organizations are also
amongst the youth. working towards provision of coaching facilities,
organizing competitions, selecting talented sportsmen
The role of sports, including adventure sports, in and supporting their development. National Institute
the development of youth has been recognised and of Sports (NIS) and Lakshmibai National Institute of
addressed not only by the government but also by Physical Education (LNIPE) provide academic courses at
various stakeholders like sports federations, private graduate and post graduate levels in the area of sports.
46 47

• Promoting excellence in sports: Investment b) Promotion of sports culture among youth:
in sports infrastructure and coaching facilities has Current participation levels in sports activities are
improved the representation of Indian sports persons very low in India as compared to countries like
in international competitions. Centres of Excellence China. A sports culture needs to be promoted among
(COE), Special Area Games (SAG) and SAI Training youth. The youth must be enabled to consider sports
Centre (STC) provide training facilities and a platform not just as recreational activity but also as potential
to promising young sports persons to participate in career option. This would require a greater focus
various local, national and international competitions. on sports activities as a part of the curriculum at
In addition, both the Central and State Governments school and college levels. State Governments,
provide incentives and awards to sports persons who educational boards and the National Cadet Corps
excel at various levels. (NCC) programme must be leveraged and further
integration of sports into formal education
4.5.2 FUTURE IMPERATIVES system can be achieved by strengthening existing
Despite the efforts of various stakeholders to support infrastructure.
the development of sports in the nation, significant
progress must be made to reach the levels of c) Support and development for talented
participation and excellence of countries like China. sportspersons:
A seamless channel for talent identification,
a) Increasing access to sports facilities and coaching, participation in competitions and incentive
training: Access to sport and physical education provision needs to be developed to promote
opportunities still remains highly inadequate, excellence in sports. A significant proportion of the
especially in rural areas and the poorer parts of urban youth, and hence the sporting talent of the nation,
areas. Schemes like PYKKA (being recast as RGKA) and is in the rural areas. Therefore, it is imperative to
NPFAI that are targeted towards development and develop robust models to identify and train high
maintenance of infrastructure for sports need to be potential sportspersons in rural areas. Coordination
strengthened further with support from MoRD and and collaboration between SAI, various sports
Ministry of Urban Development (MUD). Private sector federations, state level organizations and local
organizations need to be incentivised to participate associations is required in order to achieve this goal.
actively in setting up playgrounds and sports facilities
especially in schools, colleges and community areas.
48 49

4.6 Priority Area 6: Promotion of Social Values
4.6.1 CURRENT STATUS
• Youth must also be encouraged to develop an
Youth are the future of the nation, and in the years
appreciation of the traditional arts and culture
to come will become the leaders of the nation.
of the country. The rich and invaluable Indian
Hence, it is essential that the youth uphold social
art and culture will not survive without the
values and moral standards of highest order.
active involvement of the youth in its adoption,
promotion and preservation.
• India is a diverse nation with respect to ethnicity,
religion, language, caste and culture. Alongside this
diversity resides socio-economic disparity and
Values education is not the sole responsibility
extremism, which together have potential for creating
of the government and the education system.
a divide in the society. Hence, it is imperative to instil
It starts at home with the family and society
a sense of harmony and togetherness in individuals
playing an equally important role. Values can be
from a young age.
imparted in an individual through both classroom
education and engagement in various activities
• It is also important to develop inner values like
aimed at improvement of the society.
compassion, kindness, sympathy and empathy.
Some significant initiatives are:
There is also a serious need to inculcate the spirit of
integrity and truthfulness in the youth. They must be
• The role of education in fostering values has
encouraged to strive for excellence in all spheres of
continually been emphasised in education policies.
individual and collective activity.
Most recently, the National Curriculum Framework
and the Framework on Values in Schools have been
• With increasing industrialization and pollution,
introduced by NCERT. The idea of imparting values
sensitizing youth about protection and improvement
education is closely linked with education reforms
of the environment and developing compassion
that have been introduced under the scheme of
for other living creatures has become essential for
Continuous and Comprehensive Evaluation (CCE).
future sustainability.
50 51

4.6.2 FUTURE IMPERATIVES
The framework articulates a holistic and pragmatic Significant steps need to be taken in order to address the
approach to values education in schools. It is suggestive, issue of promotion of social values and harmony among
not prescriptive, leaving room for customisation suited the youth of the nation.
to varied needs, contexts and resources of the schools.
NCERT has been made the nodal centre for strengthening a) Moving towards formalising values education:
value education at all levels in the school system. The Framework on Values in Schools outlines broad
guidelines for schools related to provision of value
• Organizations like National Service Scheme (NSS), NYKS and education and holistic development of students. However,
the NCC are involved in the engagement of youth in various there is a need to have a formal system for imparting values
initiatives like rural development, environment protection, at all levels of school and college, making it an integral
blood donation, immunisation, disaster management etc. component of an individual’s performance evaluation.
These have the potential to foster national and social values There is a need for greater emphasis on civics, civil law
among the youth and develop a sense of responsibility and code in the formal education curriculum.
towards the nation.
b) Strengthening engagement programs for
• There are various other Government schemes / programmes youth: Organizations such as NSS, NYKS and NCC
that work towards promotion of social values. The Centre have been very successful in instilling a sense of
for Cultural Resources and Training (CCRT) under Ministry belongingness, brotherhood and harmony among youth.
of Culture administers a Scheme under which youth are These organizaations need to be strengthened and
taken to heritage monuments/ sites, museums, etc. – a expanded in their reach with increased focus on imparting
significant initiative to make the youth aware of the rich national values among the youth.
heritage of the country. The Saksham Scheme (for holistic
development for adolescent boys in age-group 11-18 c) Supporting non-government organizations
years), inter-alia, aims at inculcating in them respect for working towards spreading values and harmony:
women, and engaging them in nation-building activities. It is not possible for the government and education system
Similarly, the ‘Ahimsa Messenger’ programme of Ministry of to completely address all issues related to values education.
Women and Child Development seeks to promote respect Social groups and society at large have a significant role
for women and eliminating violence against women. in imparting and promoting social values and harmony
among youth. Every individual must act to support
and promote the work done by these organisations.
Similarly organizations promoting Indian art and culture
amongst the youth must also be encouraged and supported.
52 53

There are also several community-based youth organisations
4.7 Priority Area 7: Community Engagement in various parts of the country (including the North Eastern
Region) that work towards community development.
NGOs, non-profit organisations, corporates through their
4.7.1 CURRENT STATUS CSR programmes and social entrepreneurs are engaged
across the country on issues ranging from clean fuel usage to
Youth represent a large segment of the population that prevention of trafficking and rehabilitation. Several of these
can be mobilised for community service and development organisations have youth volunteers and youth employees.
programmes. On one hand, by participating in community
service schemes, youth can contribute to grassroots There is a need to institutionalise community engagement
development efforts and help create progress in backward and to design and streamline schemes such that they cater
regions. At the same time, these initiatives help the youth to the non-homogenous youth population.
build their own skills, such as communication, leadership,
inter-personal relationships and develop a sense of moral
responsibility and national ownership. 4.7.2 FUTURE IMPERATIVES
a) Promote and leverage existing community
MoYAS currently runs several schemes to enable youth
development organisations (CDOs):
to engage with their community, as well as to participate
While the government should continue to implement the
in grassroots development. Some of these schemes
schemes that have seen great success, going forward it
are NYKS, NYPAD and the NSS. These schemes target
should also leverage the large number of organisations
varying youth segments, and have different models of
that are already working towards community development.
participation. In addition to MoYAS schemes, there are
This will multiply the scope of youth community engagement
a range of other government schemes like the Bharat
in the nation, and has significant potential to generate
Nirman Volunteers (BNV) programme of Ministry of
positive outcomes at the grassroots level.
Rural Development. BNVs are dedicated volunteers
working in rural areas for generating awareness
among the people about their rights and entitlements. • A framework for accreditation and certification of NGOs
Similarly, the positions of community workers created or CDOs should be developed. This will enable funding
under NRLM provide opportunity to such workers to agencies and youth volunteers to select the most appropriate
get intensely involved in the development programmes, organisations based on their needs. It can promote the
besides being avenues of substantial income to them. scaling up of organisations that have clearly defined goals
and a successful track record for community development.
54 55

• A volunteer exchange platform should be set up. Through this b) Promote social entrepreneurship:
platform, the young Indians that are willing to participate There are a growing number of social entrepreneurs in India
in community development programmes can be identified. who recognise that they can create sustainable grassroots
Similarly, organisations working in the field that require young development, while making a return for themselves. The social
volunteers or employees can post their requirements. This will entrepreneurship space is fragmented and largely unregulated,
enable the matching of volunteers with organisations in an and the government should create an enabling environment for
efficient manner. social entrepreneurs.
• Institutionalise the involvement of youth in disaster response • Promoting social entrepreneurship as an attractive employment
activities. Local youth, because of their dynamism and proximity, proposition for young Indians will create a positive shift away
are invariably the first responders in any disaster relief and from volunteerism and philanthropy to sustainable development.
rescue activity. Such team activity in the face of adversity not This can transform community development and engagement
only builds camaraderie and leadership but also provides a much- from a short-term prospect for the youth into a sustainable
needed succour to the affected individuals. There is a need to career option.
create structures that tap this latent resource and realize its full
potential through proper training, equipping and coordinating • Social entrepreneurs require support in the form of seed
their efforts with those of the state disaster relief mechanism. funding and angel investment. The government can create
Every State and district of the country has Disaster Management an enabling policy regime that supports the creation of these
Authority as mandated by Disaster Management Act, 2005. The funds. It can enable identification of credible enterprises and
Civil Defence Act, 1968 has also been amended to bring ‘disaster financiers through an endorsement process. It can also reward
management’ within its scope. In addition, the panchayats also the performance of social entrepreneurs through grants-in-
have a major role under the Disaster Management Act, 2005. aid and award programmes. These rewards can create further
The youth can be closely involved in disaster response activities mobilisation of youth towards social enterprise.
through these mechanisms.
• The government is well positioned to create channels of
• Similarly, the latent potential and dynamism of youth communication between social entrepreneurs, local communities,
should also be harnessed in promoting communal harmony and investors and policymakers. Social enterprise forums can be
environmental protection. convened that enable the exchange of information around
successful models, navigating the complex policy environment,
• The energies of the youth should also be channelized in and can generate forward and backward linkages between
constructive areas through Panchayati Raj Institutions, which enterprises. Removing barriers to business on a priority basis
are increasingly playing greater role in local self-governance. for organisations with a social objective can also spawn the
This would include campaigning on various social issues and helping development of more social enterprises.
in effective implementation of various Government programmes.
56 57

MoPR runs Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan
(RGPSA) under which the focus is on building the capacities of
4.8 Priority Avrea 8: Participation in
all elected representatives of the Panchayati Raj Institutions,
Politics and Governance including the youth and first-time elected representatives.
MoRD has also taken steps to build youth participation in the
governance and monitoring of Central schemes. Youth have
4.8.1 CURRENT STATUS
been co-opted to support fund utilisation and programme
Given the youth comprise 27.5% of the population, it
implementation in the IAP districts of the country via the
is critical that youth are represented & can participate
Prime Minister’s Rural Development Fellowship (PMRDF).
in politics at all levels. Youth participation and
The Election Commission runs outreach programmes to
engagement on issues related to politics, democracy,
get young voters to register and vote in elections, thereby
accountability and governance will help create an
supporting and promoting youth participation in politics
able generation of future leaders of the country.
and democracy.
As the number of government schemes and direct
Despite a growing focus on youth participation in lower levels
pay-outs to beneficiaries increase, it is important to
of governance, and a clear political push to help more young
ensure that the citizenry is active and engaged in
people transition from student and youth politics to national
order to prevent leakages. In the 12th Plan period, the
politics; there is very little coordinated action to promote
funds to PRIs has increased 10-fold over the 11th Plan
youth engagement in politics and governance. Furthermore,
period from Rs 636 crores to Rs 6,437 crores, further
existing programmes such as those run by MoPR are focused
stressing the importance of social mobilisation at
on youth who are already elected leaders or in some way
the grassroots. An engaged citizenry will help build
associated with politics, rather than on bringing more youth
accountability and ensure better governance, and
into political systems.
can also facilitate the implementation of schemes.
The youth can be leveraged as a resource to monitor
Civil society groups are working hard, often through
the implementation and promote accountability of
partnerships with government, to bridge these gaps.
welfare schemes and development projects across
However, without a coordinated push and clear youth focus,
the country.
these programmes are unlikely to be sufficient to help bring
youth into the folds of politics and promote civic engagement
at all levels of governance.
58 59

• It is important to build awareness on the importance of an active
4.8.2 FUTURE IMPERATIVES
citizenry. Education curriculums must be revised such that the
a) Engage youth that are outside the political system:
civics component is made more relevant. Youth must be made
It is important to ensure that youth participate in politics at all
aware of the various channels available to them to engage with
levels, from the grassroots to the national stage.
and question government agencies.
• There are several pull and push factors that govern youth
• Youth monitoring and accountability creation in the areas of
participation in politics. A detailed analysis of these is required
government expenditure and social welfare schemes must be
in order to create effective policies and programmes to enable
institutionalised. Public expenditure records must be made more
youth participation in politics. Youth perceptions of politics must
transparent and accessible for all segments of the population.
be understood in order to create effective strategies to combat
The 12th Plan details out the role of social mobilisers and
any negative perceptions. Politics must be made attractive
highlights the importance of citizen participation in planning
& appropriate reward systems must be created to incentivise
and implementation of centrally sponsored schemes (CSS). It lists
youth to enter politics. Barriers to entry, such as financial
a provision for dedicated funds allocated to all flagship schemes
resources for campaign activities, must be lowered. Improved
to promote citizen participation in governance, and action
channels of transition from student politics to national politics
must be taken to implement this. Social audit processes must be
must be developed.
institutionalised to enable youth to provide structured inputs on
the effectiveness of government expenditure.
• It is important to note that youth political participation is not
limited to young individuals contesting elections. It also includes
The youth should be involved in Gram Sabha / Mahila Sabha
mobilising the youth to vote and promote the effective functioning
meetings, for monitoring the implementing of programmes at
of democratic systems and processes. A more consistent effort is
village level. On-going monitoring & informal feedback channels
required to engage with young voters, understand their concerns
must also be created between the bureaucracy and the citizens.
and help them see the short-term and long-term benefits of
voting for their most preferred candidate or party.
c) Promote youth engagement in urban governance:
There has been a significant focus on the functioning of PRIs and
b) Create governance mechanisms that youth can leverage:
rural governance mechanisms that engage the citizenry. However,
The Right to Information (RTI) Act is a landmark legislation
a similar focus on urban governance and the role of the citizenry
that enables ordinary citizens to understand and question the
in supporting Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) is missing. Given the
workings of government.
increasing urbanisation and anonymity that characterises urban
life, it is all the more important for the government to act as an
intermediary and create channels and processes by which young
Indians can engage with urban decision makers and contribute
to urban governance.
60 61

4.9 Priority Area 9: Youth Engagement
Leadership and personal development is often a by-
product of other youth schemes such as NYKS, NSS and
NCC. These skills are also imparted in varying measures
4.9.1 CURRENT STATUS through the education curriculum in schools and colleges.
The objective of GoI engagement with the youth is
two-fold. First, GoI must engage with youth in order to While there are a few programmes of varying success
provide them with information and enable holistic youth that support holistic development of youth, structured
development. Second, GoI must engage with youth in order programmes that help the GoI engage with youth are
to get inputs on issues, policies and specific programmes, absent. There are some unstructured interactions between
especially those that directly impact youth. By engaging policy makers and young Indians in forums such as
with the youth and by ensuring youth develop leadership educational institutions. However, there are no systematic
and other interpersonal skills, the GoI will help create channels for engagement between the government and
a generation of individuals that are committed to civic, young citizens and no mechanisms for youth to provide
social and political progress. inputs to government. This gap has in part been filled by
some organisations that provide analysis and commentary
GoI, through MoYAS, runs several programmes for youth on public policy issues.
engagement with the objective of promoting holistic youth
development and leadership. These include the NPYAD,
Scouting and Guiding, adventure schemes, etc. The Rajiv 4.9.2 FUTURE IMPERATIVES
Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development (RGNIYD)
also provides training and capacity building for members a) Measure and monitor effectiveness of GoI’s
of various youth related organisations. GoI has decided to development schemes: MoYAS is well positioned to
convert RGNIYD into an Institute of National Importance leverage its existing grassroots volunteer network through
and this is currently under implementation. MoYAS is also NYKS, NCC and NSS to undertake an assessment of the
in the process of setting up a Youth Development Fund effectiveness of GoI’s development schemes. Successful
which would help channelize private sector contributions efforts can be replicated to ensure that youth in all segments
under CSR for GoI’s youth development efforts. are benefiting from these programmes, and targeted
schemes for unaddressed segments can be implemented.
62 63

b) Create a platform for engagement with youth: • MoYAS should identify a sub-section of youth that it
It is critical for the government to create a structured interacts with in a more continuous & structured manner
platform for engagement with the youth across the who can help support its programmes and activities. It
country. There are different objectives for engagement, should set up a Youth Advisory Council of exceptional
and therefore, different engagement models must be yet representative individuals. This council can provide
piloted and implemented. more detailed inputs to government on key policy issues,
run programmes to mobilise youth and engage more
• Government should engage with all the youth of regularly with diverse segments of the youth.
the nation to provide them information and do a regular
“pulse check”. Some ways this can be undertaken include • GoI should also enable RGNIYD as an Institute of
youth forums at various levels, an interactive online National Importance so that it fulfils its mandate of
portal and wikipedia-style forums. The government serving as an apex level resource centre for policy
can leverage partner organisations like NYKS and NSS, advocacy and capacity building in youth development
NGOs and educational institutions to connect with the efforts in the country.
youth and use technology and social media in order to
achieve this objective.
• Government should engage with a representative
cross-section of youth to get inputs on specific policy
issues. This can be done by conducting thematic
workshops, putting out calls for policy notes through
ICT based channels, etc. Based on the issue, the
government can identify representative educational
institutions, youth groups and other partners to create
a channel to engage with the youth.
64 65

4.10 Priority Area 10: Inclusion
4.10.1 CURRENT STATUS • Youth that suffer from social or moral stigma
There are a number of youth at risk and marginalised including but not limited to Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual
youth who require special attention in order to ensure and Transgender (LGBT) youth, youth infected or
that they can access and benefit from the government affected by HIV/AIDS.
programmes. These youth can broadly be categorised
as follows: • Youth in institutional care, orphanages, correctional
homes and prisons.
• Socially and economically disadvantaged youth,
including but not limited to youth belonging to SC/ ST/ The categorisation reflects the shared solutions
OBC groups, migrant youth and women. that may be devised to support these youth, whose
enablement and empowerment must be a priority
• Out-of-school or drop-outs from the formal for the government.
educational mainstream.
A number of Ministries are working on addressing
• Youth living in conflict affected districts, especially the challenges of these categories of youth. Some
those affected by Left Wing Extremism (LWE) and sector-specific Ministries have special programmes
youth from Jammu & Kashmir and the North East. targeted at these groups that seek to create a more
inclusive and equitable society. For example, MHRD
• Youth living with disability or suffering from chronic has special schemes to support girls’ education and
diseases. bridge the sizeable gender gap in enrolment at all
levels of schooling. Other Ministries act as nodal
• Youth at risk, including but not limited to youth agencies responsible for the well-being of specific
suffering from substance abuse, youth at risk of groups, for example, MoTA deals with issues that
human trafficking and youth working in hazardous tribals face such as livelihood security and promotion
occupations, sex workers. of or access to education.
66 67

The Department of Disability Affairs under MoSJE supports
SC/ST/OBC youth and women have a considerable number of
individuals with disabilities through various Schemes for
policies targeted at them to promote equity and inclusion.
education scholarships, support for purchasing aids or
These are in the areas of (a) education scholarships
appliances, grants for rehabilitation and incentives to
and hostels, (b) credit to support self-employment and
employers for hiring disabled individuals, etc.
entrepreneurship, (c) rehabilitation of individuals from
certain occupations such as manual scavenging, and
The government recognises that not only is it essential
(d) reservations at different levels of governance.
to support youth currently at risk but also to ensure that
These policies attempt to mainstream individuals from
youth are not faced with circumstances in the future that
these groups into the society from an early age, with
put them at risk. For example, for youth currently abusing
the objective that successive generations will be able to
drugs and alcohol, the GoI takes an inter-sectoral approach
benefit and move out of disadvantage and poverty.
of covering awareness and information dissemination,
counselling and rehabilitation.
With respect to LWE and other conflict-affected regions,
there has been an increased focus on creating infrastructure
Besides the above programmes targeted at specific
and development in such regions. GoI has also set up a
sections of disadvantaged youth or youth at risk, other
range of schemes to provide employment opportunities to
government programmes also maintain special focus on
youth living in conflict-affected regions in order to ensure
such sections of the youth. For instance, NRLM of MoRD
that the youth are productively engaged. For instance,
seeks to give high priority to youth belonging to categories
the Planning Commission has been implementing an
like ST/ SC/ OBC/ Primitive Tribal Groups (PTGs), migrants,
Integrated Action Plan (IAP) in 82 selected Districts (now
minorities, victims of human trafficking, youth from LWE
increased to 88) of the 9 LWE affected States since 2010-
Districts, North East and J&K, youth engaged in hazardous
11 for accelerated development of these areas. Skill
occupations etc.
development has been a major area of focus under this
Plan. Similarly, the Ministry of Home Affairs also provides
funds to Central Armed Police Forces deployed in LWE
affected areas to undertake skill development schemes
under Civic Action Programme.
68 69

c) Develop a multi-pronged approach to supporting
youth with disability: While the GoI has taken several
steps to support youth with disability, it is important to
4.10.2 FUTURE IMPERATIVES
create systems and infrastructure to enable these youth
a) Enablement and capability building for
to lead normal lives. The 12th Five Year Plan makes a
disadvantaged youth:
set of recommendations on steps required to empower
individuals with disabilities, and all relevant Ministries
It is essential that the government continues to
must develop action plans in this regard.
promote equity in the formal system and focuses
on mainstreaming socially and economically
d) Create awareness and opportunities to prevent
disadvantaged youth. The GoI must review its current
youth being put at risk: While the government is
programmes for these youth and identify where
working to create support and rehabilitation systems for
these programmes have been effective, and where
youth at risk, it is essential to simultaneously build systems
they have failed and the reasons for this. A critical
to ensure that youth are not forced to put themselves
area of focus for disadvantaged youth is education
into situations that constitute physical or mental risk.
and while the MHRD is taking steps towards ensuring
A targeted awareness and outreach programme for
education for all, via RTE and other programmes,
youth that are likely to be at risk must be developed and
an inter-sectoral approach is needed to ensure that
undertaken as a matter of priority.
youth can make the most of education programmes
by being in good health and not losing out on
income generating opportunities that they perceive
as more valuable.
b) Ensuring economic opportunities for youth in
conflict-affected regions: A key factor thought to
contribute to youth participation in violent conflicts
and extremism is the lack of livelihood opportunities.
Hence, it is essential to ensure that these youth are
provided with livelihood opportunities. In the longer
term, a programme of infrastructure development,
socio-political access and awareness building can
prevent youth from being attracted to such activities.
70 71

4.11 Priority Area 11: Social Justice
4.11.2 FUTURE IMPERATIVES
4.11.1 CURRENT STATUS
It is important to ensure that youth of all backgrounds a) Leveraging youth to eliminate unjust social
are free from discrimination, stigma, and disadvantage; practices:
and have recourse to a justice system that is swift and The youth of the country can be leveraged to build
equitable. A concerted effort has been made to ensure awareness and provide education at the grassroots in
that GoI programmes are inclusive, and that disadvantaged order to eliminate unjust social practices. Furthermore,
groups are supported. It is important that an effort is the youth can also be trained to monitor and report on
made to mainstream the disadvantaged groups through the prevalence of unjust social practices at the grassroots.
affirmative action and other targeted programmes.
Furthermore, there is need for greater monitoring b) Strengthen access to justice at all levels:
and media attention to prevent illegal social practices Individuals must be given stronger access to formal
such as dowry, child marriage, honour killings, caste- justice at all levels. The pace at which trials are held must
based discrimination and stigmatisation of LGBT youth. be increased, in order for formal punishment to act as a
Hence, it is important to create systems of education and serious deterrent. Inputs must be taken on the current
moral transformation at the grassroots level to eliminate constraints and bottlenecks at the grassroots level and
these practices of stigmatization and discrimination, and appropriate action taken.
deliver social justice for all.
72 73

MONITORING,
EVALUATION AND
REVIEW
Defining success of NYP-2014
5.1 It is essential to monitor and evaluate
the success of NYP-2014 in order to understand
the impact of the policy on the youth and to
determine future strategies for the youth of
the nation. In the short-run, NYP-2014 can be
considered successful if it documents priority
areas that should be the immediate focus
for youth development, creates guidelines
from which stakeholders can develop
actionable strategies and builds alignment
amongst stakeholders, providing them with a
concrete framework for action. In the longer
term, success can be defined on the basis
of whether the objectives of NYP-2014 for
youth have been achieved. That is, whether
the youth are productive, healthy and active,
socially responsible, politically engaged and
mainstreamed. Together, these definitions
create a framework for measuring the success
of NYP-2014, and provide guidelines for
selecting appropriate indicators.
74 75

Indicators for measuring success of
Monitoring and Evaluation
NYP-2014
5.2 The NYP-2014 seeks to define the Vision of the
5.5 There are two types of indicators that can be
Government for the youth of the country and to identify
selected to measure the impact or success of a policy;
the key areas where action is required and not enough is
leading and lagging indicators. Leading indicators
being done, to enable youth development. It is intended
measure short-run impact of the policy, and are more
to serve as a guiding document and provide a framework
likely to be process-based. They are an early signal of
for action for all stakeholders.
whether the policy is on track to achieve its objectives.
Lagging indicators, on the other hand, measure the
5.3 Keeping in mind the diversity of the country and
longer term impact of the policy, once it has been in place
the need to address region-specific needs and concerns
for a sufficient length of time. These indicators measure
of young people that are not adequately reflected in the
whether the policy has had an impact on the outcomes
NYP-2014, each state should also enunciate its own State
it was intended to alter, and therefore, whether it has
Youth Policy, keeping the overall national perspective
achieved its objectives.
set out in the NYP-2014 in view.
5.6 Leading indicators of success of NYP-2014
5.4 In light of the fact that many Ministries of GoI
measure whether the policy has provided a framework
have significant components of their policies and
and guidelines for stakeholders, thereby achieving its
programmes that are relevant to the youth, an inter-
purpose. The following four leading indicators have
sectoral approach is imperative for dealing with youth-
been selected:
related issues. In view of this, the NYP-2014, consistent
with the suggestion made in earlier Policy documents,
a) Number of States that have created a youth policy?
advocates the establishment of a coordinating mechanism
b) Number of times has NYP-2014 been referenced in
at the Centre and state levels. The State Coordinating
other Central/ State policy documents, reports and RFDs?
Committee may be chaired by the Chief Minister of the
state or a senior member of the cabinet. This will ensure c) Number of times NYP-2014 has been referenced in
optimum utilisation of resources available with different stakeholder documents, including media, civil society,
Ministries and Departments and streamlining of policy private sector?
and programme interventions.
d) Number of policies/ programmes that have been
initiated to close gaps identified in NYP-2014?
76 77

5.7 Lagging indicators of success of NYP-2014 5.8 A baseline assessment must be undertaken
measure the progress towards achieving each one and annual targets must be set for each one of
of the 5 objectives for youth set out in the policy. the indicators. In the event these are not met, an
The following 8 lagging indicators have been selected investigation into the reasons for this must be done
for the corresponding objectives/ priority areas: and appropriate course correction actions must be
initiated. These indicators may also be combined into
a comprehensive Youth Development Index.
EXHIBIT E.6: LAGGING INDICATORS FOR NYP 2014
Biennial “Status of the Youth” Report
Create a productive Youth Unemployment Rate Completion Rate of
workforce Higher Education
5.9 NYP-2014 recommends that MoYAS publish
a Status of the Youth Report every 2 years. This
report should provide comprehensive information
Develop a strong & Maternal Matality Rate Gold medals per capita on all youth related schemes and programmes, as
healthy generation won at Commonwealth implemented by various Ministries. The reports
Games
should identify progress against targets on the
leading and lagging indicators of success of NYP-
2014. This report should also synthesise the views and
Instill social values
and promote Number of delinquent youth (IPC & SLL1) priorities identified through bottom-up engagement
community service with the youth. Finally, the report will document any
previously unidentified challenges facing the youth,
and recommend the way forward in these areas.
Promote Number of elected PRI Youth voter turnout
participation and members below age 35
civic engagement
Review of NYP-2014
5.10 NYP-2014 will be reviewed every 5 years in
Ensure inclusion Unemployment rate across different social groups order to enable GoI to take stock of key achievements
and social justice and challenges, and refocus the priorities for youth,
going forward.
78 79

RECOMMENDATIONS
ON THE WAY FORWARD
Given that youth comprise 27.5% of the
population and will play a crucial role in the
progress and development of the nation,
supporting and enabling the youth must be
made a priority. This document details 11
priority areas and highlights specific gaps
where action is required in order to help youth
overcome the challenges they face and India to
reap the benefits of its demographic dividend.
It is important to identify the most appropriate
set of interventions for youth development,
and invest in the ones that will have the
maximum impact in each of these priority
areas. This requires a review of existing
government programmes for the youth, an
analysis of the impact of stakeholder activities
and pilot projects before mass roll-out of new
programmes for the youth. Furthermore,
it must be noted that given the scale of the
challenge, it is imperative to have a concerted
effort from all stakeholders.
80 81

Stakeholders must be aligned on the objectives for youth 6.2 Mainstream youth issues in the
development and participation, and must work in a coordinated development process
manner to facilitate holistic youth development. Innovative
It is evident that the youth will play a crucial role in the future
solutions that leverage available resources and tools are required
development of the nation. Hence it is important that the issues
to empower the youth of the nation.
related to youth are mainstreamed and youth become a national
priority. This can be achieved in several ways, including:
6.1 GoI needs to increase investment in the
• Building Youth Development into RFDS:
youth to capture the demographic dividend
As identified in Section-4, youth development is not an activity
that can be performed in isolation by MoYAS. One key mechanism
Youth present a considerable economic opportunity today
for ensuring that all Ministries work towards mainstreaming
which the government should capitalise on. There is a huge
youth development and participation is to identify linkages
opportunity for improvements in productivity of the youth
between MoYAS and other Ministries and incorporate these
through programs targeted towards education, skilling,
into the respective RFDs. Youth engagement and participation
entrepreneurship development and health care.
measures must be included as metrics of success of various
government programmes in the respective RFDs.
GoI is currently spending approximately Rs 2,710 on every young
individual through various Ministries, of which Rs 1,100 is through
• Key Ministries Should Develop a ‘Youth Connect’
targeted programs. In order to capitalise on this opportunity,
Programme:
the government would need to invest more in youth across the
Given the fact that youth comprise 27.5% of the population,
various priority areas.
and represent a large proportion of the target segment of
most of the Ministries, it is important to ensure key Ministries
communicate with the youth. NYP-2014 recommends that all
relevant Ministries should set up a mandatory ‘Youth Connect’
programme which is a targeted youth outreach programme.
This programme will inform and educate the youth about
the various schemes and programmes available to them that
are administered by the Ministry. It can run offline through a
combination of workshops, briefings and information sessions
or online using ICT and social media, tailored to the relevant
scheme. The outreach material and information from these
programmes can also be fed into the more broad-based MoYAS
youth engagement portal.
82 83

6.4 Leverage various channels for effective
6.3 Discuss and define role of all stakeholders
youth engagement and participation
Given the scale of the challenges facing the youth and the wide
range of stakeholders engaged in various capacities, it is important There are several existing channels that the government
to define the role of each stakeholder. There are two possible can leverage to effectively engage with youth and promote
roles, that of a ‘doer’ responsible for creating programmes, or an youth development. Two key ones are ICT and other youth
‘enabler’ that creates a supporting environment for action and organisations.
promotes the work of other stakeholders. It is important to build
stakeholder maps in each priority area in order to understand the • Use ICT to engage with the youth: ICT and social media
range of actors and activities. For each priority area, it is important are key tools that can be leveraged to connect and engage
to determine which stakeholders are responsible for directly with the youth. Given the growing penetration of the internet
financing and implementing programmes, and which stakeholders amongst young people, especially via smartphones, the GoI
are responsible for creating an enabling environment. Formal should more actively engage with the youth using technologies
channels for stakeholder interaction must also be developed. For that they access on a daily basis. Youth outreach programmes
example, with respect to community engagement, MoYAS could no longer have to be physically implemented through youth
act as a ‘doer’ through its programmes like NSS, NYKS and NYC, clubs and other such networks, but can also be implemented
which work towards engaging youth in community development via the internet, mobile phone applications and social media.
initiatives. MoYAS also has a key ‘enabling’ role to create
systems that help the youth connect with existing community • Promote youth development through existing
development organisations and support their work. organisations: The government should work towards
leveraging the vast number of stakeholders that are already
working to support youth development and participation, and
expanding its own reach and access to the youth through the
networks of these organisations.
All stakeholders should review their strategies in line with
the priorities for youth development identified in NYP-2014.
They should create action plans, design programmes in specific
areas and monitor and evaluate their impact on the youth.
84 85

LIST OF ACRONYMS NCC National Cadet Corps
NCERT National Council of Educational Research and Training
ASHAs Accredited Social Health Activists NIS National Institute of Sports
AWWs Anganwadi Workers NPFAI National Playing Fields Association of India
BCG The Boston Consulting Group (India) Private Limited NPYAD National Programme for Youth and Adolescent Development
BNV Bharat Nirman Volunteers NRHM National Rural Health Mission
CCE Continuous and Comprehensive Evaluation NRLM National Rural Livelihoods Mission
COE Centre of Excellence NSDP National Skill Development Policy
DAC Department of AIDS Control NSQF National Skills Qualifications Framework
EBRs Economically Backward Regions NSS National Service Scheme
GER Gross Enrolment Rates NYC National Youth Corps
GNI Gross National Income NYKS Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan
GoI Government of India NYP-2014 National Youth Policy, 2014
ICT Information and Communication Technology PEO Programme Evaluation Organisation
IEO Independent Evaluation Office PHC Primary Health Centre
ITI Industrial Training Institute PMEGP Prime Minister’s Employment Generation Programme
JSY Janani Suraksha Yojana PMRDF Prime Minister’s Rural Development Fellowship
LAMP Legislative Assistants to Members of Parliament PMSSY Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana
LNIPE Lakshmibai National Institute of Physical Education PPP Public Private Partnership
LWE Left Wing Extremism PRIs Panchayati Raj Institutions
MECs Micro-Enterprise Consultants PYKKA Panchayat Yuva Krida Aur Khel Abhiyan
MGNREGA Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act RFD Results Framework Document
MHRD Ministry of Human Resource Development RGNIYD Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of Youth Development
MLE Ministry of Labour and Employment RGPSA Rajiv Gandhi Panchayat Sashaktikaran Abhiyan
MMR Maternal Mortality Rate RGUMY Rajiv Gandhi Udyami Mitra Yojana
MoHFW Ministry of Health and Family Welfare RMSA Rashtriya Madhyamik Shiksha Abhiyan
MoPR Ministry of Panchayati Raj RSETIs Rural Self-employment Training Institutes
MoRD Ministry of Rural Development RTE Right to Education Act
MoSJE Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment RTI Right to Information Act
MoSME Ministry of Small and Medium Enterprises RUSA Rashtriya Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan
MoTA Ministry of Tribal Affairs SAG Special Area Games
MoWCD Ministry of Women and Child Development SAI Sports Authority of India
MoYAS Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports STC SAI Training Centre
MSMEs Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises UGC University Grants Commission
MUD Ministry of Urban Development UHC Universal Health Coverage
NACO National AIDS Control Organisation ULBs Urban Local Bodies
86 87

88 89

90
designed
by:
roopali
jain