NATIONAL POLICY FOR FARMERS
2007
Department of Agriculture & Cooperation
Ministry of Agriculture
Government of India

““““kkkkjjjjnnnn iiiiooookkkkjjjj ÑÑÑÑffff’’’’kkkk]]]] mmmmiiiiHHHHkkkkkkkkssDDssDDrrrrkkkk eeeekkkkeeeeyyyyss]]ss]] [[[[kkkkkkkk|||| vvvvkkkkSSjjSSjj
llllkkkkooooZZttZZttffffuuuudddd ffffoooorrrrjjjj....kkkk eeeeaa==aa==hhhh
SHARAD PAWAR
HHHHkkkkkkkkjjjjrrrr lllljjjjddddkkkkjjjj
MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE
& CONSUMER AFFAIRS
FOOD AND PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
PREFACE
The National Commission on Farmers (NCF) under the chairmanship of Prof.
M.S. Swaminathan submitted its final report in October 2006. The NCF prepared, along
with its final report, a draft National Policy for Farmers incorporating its main
recommendations. Based on the draft prepared by the NCF and after consultations with
State Governments and the Central Ministries concerned, Government of India approved
the National Policy for Farmers, 2007.
The primary focus of this policy is on ‘farmer’ defined holistically and not merely
on agriculture. In that sense, it is much more comprehensive than an Agriculture Policy.
The objective is, inter alia, to improve the economic viability of farming through
substantially improving net income of farmers. Needless to say, there is emphasis on
increased productivity, profitability, institutional support, and improvement of land,
water and support services apart from provisions of appropriate price policy, risk
mitigation measures and so on.
The 53rd meeting of the National Development Council (NDC) held on the 29th
May 2007 was exclusively for addressing issues of the agriculture sector. Government of
India has recently taken several initiatives such as the National Horticulture Mission, the
National Bamboo Mission, reforms in agricultural marketing, the revitalization of
cooperative credit structure and setting up of the National Fisheries Development Board
and the National Rainfed Area Authority. More recently, the National Food Security
Mission and the Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (Additional Central Assistance Scheme)
have been approved to substantially enhance investment in agriculture and increase
production and productivity. All these initiatives are in consonance with the intent,
direction and measures suggested in the National Policy for Farmers.
I am confident that the new policy, together with the initiatives already taken by
the government, would help accelerate the overall growth of the sector and improve the
well-being of millions of farmers in the country.
(SHARAD PAWAR)
11 September, 2007
New Delhi

Contents
1 1
Need for Policy Re-Orientation
2 Recent Initiatives 2
3 Major Policy Goals 3
Definition of Farmer 4
4 Asset Reforms to Empower Farmers 4
Land 4
Water 5
Livestock 6
Fisheries 7
Bio-Resources 7
Animal Genetic Resources 9
5 Support Services 9
Science and Technology 9
Agricultural Bio-Security 11
Agro-Meteorology 11
Climate Change 11
Inputs and Services 12
Credit and Insurance 13
Cooperatives 14
Extension, Training and Knowledge Connectivity 15
Social Security 15
Agricultural Prices, Marketing and Trade 16
Integration with Processing and Value Chain 17
17
Curriculum Reform
6 Special Categories of Farmers 18

Tribal Farmers 18
Pastoralists 18
Other Categories 19
Plantation Farmers 19
Island Farmers 19
Urban Farmers 19
7 Special Categories of Farming 19
Organic Farming 19
Green Agriculture 20
Genetically Modified (GM) Crops 20
Protected (Greenhouse) Agriculture 20
8 Special Regions 21
Distress Hotspots 21
Mega Bio-Diversity Areas 21
9 Farmers of the Future 21
10 Attracting Youth 22
11 Other Policy Measures 23
12 Operationalisation of the Policy 24

1
1
NEED FOR POLICY RE-ORIENTATION
1.1 The importance of agriculture in the farmers. Our scientists contributed by
socio-economic fabric of India can be developing high yielding varieties /
realised from the fact that the livelihood hybrids of crops. These were introduced
of majority of the country’s population to farmers who, in turn, adopted the new
depends on agriculture. The agriculture seeds and technology. As a result, a
sector contributes only about 18 per cent major breakthrough in productivity and
of the total Gross Domestic Product production occurred in wheat in the late
(GDP), with more than 60% population 1960s. Moreover, the new strategy laid
dependence, resulting in low per capita emphasis on greater cropping intensity.
income in the farm sector. Consequently, Since then, the progress of agricultural
there is a large disparity between the per production was steady and the growth
capita income in the farm sector and the rate in food production maintained a
non-farm sector. Therefore, it is essential level above that of population growth.
to deal with those issues which impact This came to be known as the “Green
the income levels of farmers. The Revolution Era” that resulted in a
income levels are determined by the situation of self sufficiency in
overall production, supported by foodgrains. This era was characterised
reasonable levels of yield and prices by synergy among technology, services,
realised by the farmers. Several public policy and farmers’
constraints such as preponderance of entrepreneurship. However, during the
small and marginal holdings accounting past decade, the growth rate shows a
for about 82 per cent of total holdings, declining trend; production and
imperfect market conditions and lack of productivity have remained almost
backward and forward linkages affect stagnant. A considerable effort,
the income levels of farmers adversely. therefore, is required to reverse the
Accordingly, an appropriate policy deceleration and get agriculture moving
needs to be evolved to ensure that forward once again.
farming activity becomes more viable
and the economic condition of farmers is 1.3 The National Agriculture Policy
improved on a sustainable basis. approved by the Government of India
during 2000, aimed to achieve annual
1.2 Several steps have been taken in the past growth of more than 4 per cent in the
to strengthen agricultural research, agriculture sector on a sustainable basis,
education and extension, as well as to through the efficient use of natural
ensure timely and adequate availability resources and combination of other
of essential inputs such as seeds, measures. However, the annual growth
fertilizer and electricity. Also, several rate achieved during the Tenth Five Year
major and minor irrigation projects have Plan (2002–03 to 2006–07) averaged
been implemented. An integrated around 2.3 per cent. On the other hand
programme of agricultural development the non-farm sector has grown faster.
was initiated in the early 1960s to Considering the high growth of GDP in
improve productivity and to benefit the recent past, a major reorientation in
National Policy for Farmers

2
the policy is necessary to make this non-farm sector and development of
growth more inclusive. The decline in clusters around towns/market centres. A
agricultural growth coupled with growing farm sector, better rural
declining profitability in the agriculture infrastructure and connectivity, skill
sector, in the face of rapid growth of development, adequate power supply
non-farm sector, is one of the major and easy availability of credit would
concerns. The declining profitability is help in the creation of more employment
partially due to fluctuating world prices opportunities in the rural non-farm
of agricultural commodities and the sector and, in turn, enhance the income
efforts to keep the domestic prices low of farm households.
to protect consumers’ interest, which
resulted in decline in the terms of trade 1.5 In view of the above, there is a need to
for the farm sector. This, coupled with focus more on the economic well-being
the stagnating and declining yield levels, of the farmers, rather than just on
resulted in low income to the farmers. production. Socio-economic well-being
must be a prime consideration of
1.4 Another major problem confronting the agricultural policy, besides production
rural areas in general and farm and growth. The aim of the Policy is,
households in particular, is the lack of therefore, to stimulate attitudes and
employment opportunities. Efforts are actions which should result in assessing
needed to increase job opportunities in agricultural progress in terms of
the farm sector through increased improvement in the income of farm
investment in irrigation, watershed families, not only to meet their
development, wasteland development, consumption requirements but also to
land reclamation, etc. In addition, there enhance their capacity to invest in farm
has to be a greater focus on the related activities.
accelerated development of the rural
2
RECENT INITIATIVES
2.1 Several significant initiatives have National Rainfed Area Authority; (vii)
already been taken in recent years by the Establishment of the National Fisheries
government to reverse the downward Development Board (NFDB); (viii)
trend in agricultural production and to Watershed Development and Micro
find sustainable solutions for Irrigation Programmes; (ix) Reforms in
strengthening the farmers’ livelihood Agricultural Marketing and
and income. Some of these important Development of Market Infrastructure;
initiatives include: (i) Bharat Nirman; (x) Revitalisation of Cooperative
(ii) National Rural Employment Sector; (xi) Agri-business Development
Guarantee Programme; (iii) National through Venture Capital Participation by
Horticulture Mission; (iv) Expansion of the Small Farmer Agri-business
Institutional Credit to Farmers; (v) Consortium; (xii) Reform and Support
Establishment of the National Bee for Agriculture Extension Services;
Board; (vi) Establishment of the (xiii) National Rural Health Mission;
National Policy for Farmers

3
(xiv) National Food Security Mission; Regulation; (xviii) Protection of Plant
(xv) Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana to Varieties and Farmers’ Rights (PPVFR)
incentivise the states to invest more in Act, 2001; (xix) National Bamboo
agriculture; (xvi) Integrated Food Law; Mission and (xx) Knowledge
(xvii) Legislative Framework for Connectivity through Common Service
Warehousing Development and Centres (CSC) and IT initiatives.
3
MAJOR POLICY GOALS
3.1 The major goals of the National Policy (vii) To complete the unfinished agenda
for Farmers are: in land reforms and to initiate
(i) To improve economic viability of comprehensive asset and aquarian
farming by substantially increasing reforms.
the net income of farmers and to (viii) To mainstream the human and
ensure that agricultural progress is gender dimension in all farm
measured by advances made in policies and programmes.
this income. (ix) To pay explicit attention to
(ii) To protect and improve land, sustainable rural livelihoods.
water, bio-diversity and genetic (x) To foster community-centred food,
resources essential for sustained water and energy security systems
increase in the productivity, in rural India and to ensure
profitability and stability of major nutrition security at the level of
farming systems by creating an every child, woman and man.
economic stake in conservation. (xi) To introduce measures which can
(iii) To develop support services help attract and retain youths in
including provision for seeds, farming and processing of farm
irrigation, power, machinery and products for higher value addition
implements, fertilizers and credit by making it intellectually
at affordable prices in adequate stimulating and economically
quantity for farmers. rewarding.
(iv) To strengthen the bio-security of (xii) To make India a global
crops, farm animals, fish and outsourcing hub in the production
forest trees for safeguarding the and supply of the inputs needed
livelihood and income security of for sustainable agriculture,
farmer families and the health and products and processes developed
trade security of the nation. through biotechnology and
(v) To provide appropriate price and Information and Communication
trade policy mechanisms to Technology (ICT).
enhance farmers’ income. (xiii) To restructure the agricultural
(vi) To provide for suitable risk curriculum and pedagogic
management measures for methodologies for enabling every
adequate and timely compensation farm and home science graduate to
to farmers. become an entrepreneur and to
National Policy for Farmers

4
make agricultural education producing other primary agricultural
gender sensitive. commodities and will include all
(xiv) To develop and introduce a social agricultural operational holders,
security system for farmers. cultivators, agricultural labourers,
(xv) To provide appropriate sharecroppers, tenants, poultry and
opportunities in adequate measure livestock rearers, fishers, beekeepers,
for non-farm employment for the gardeners, pastoralists, non-corporate
farm households. planters and planting labourers, as well
as persons engaged in various farming-
3.2 Definition of Farmer related occupations such as sericulture,
vermiculture, and agro-forestry. The
For the purpose of this Policy, the term term will also include tribal families /
“FARMER” will refer to a person persons engaged in shifting cultivation
actively engaged in the economic and/or and in the collection, use and sale of
livelihood activity of growing crops and minor and non-timber forest produce.
4
ASSET REFORMS TO EMPOWER FARMERS
4.1 The purpose of asset reforms is to ensure (Amendment) Act, 2005, the provision
that every farmer household in villages of appropriate support services to
possesses and/or has access to women farmers has become urgent.
productive assets like land, livestock, Joint pattas for both homestead and
fishpond, homestead farm and/or income agricultural land are essential for
through an enterprise and or market- empowering women to access credit and
driven skills, so that the household other services.
income is increased substantially on a
sustainable basis. This, in turn, would 4.2.2 The Land Acquisition Act would be
ensure nutrition and livelihood security reviewed with particular reference to the
and their education and health assessment of compensation. Prime
requirements. farmland must be conserved for
agriculture except under exceptional
4.2 Land circumstances, provided that the
agencies that are provided with
4.2.1 Considering the skewed ownership of agricultural land for non-agricultural
land, it is necessary to strengthen projects should compensate for treatment
implementation of laws relating to land and full development of equivalent
reforms, with particular reference to degraded / wastelands elsewhere.
tenancy laws, land leasing, distribution Further, the commitment under the
of ceiling surplus land and wasteland, existing re-settlement policy of the
providing adequate access to common Central / State governments would be
property and wasteland resources and fulfilled in letter and spirit. For non-
the consolidation of holdings. Following agricultural purposes, as far as possible,
the conferment of land rights to women land with low biological potential for
under the Hindu Succession farming would be earmarked and
National Policy for Farmers

5
allocated. State governments would be supply. Water quality also needs
advised to earmark lands with low attention, since it often gets polluted at
biological potential such as uncultivable the source due to its over-exploitation
land, land affected by salinity, acidity, and the indiscriminate use of fertilizers,
etc., for non-agricultural development pesticides and toxic chemicals.
activities, including industrial and
construction activities. 4.3.3 Besides addressing the problems relating
to adequacy and quality, equity in water
4.3 Water distribution would be ensured. Water is a
public resource, and not a private
4.3.1 Non-availability of timely and adequate property. Therefore, priority would be
water for irrigation is now becoming a given to evolve mechanisms for just and
serious constraint in achieving higher equitable access to water and to include
productivity and stability of farming in local people in managing water
many parts of the country. Therefore, resources. Women would be given a
assured irrigation is the need of the hour. significant role as water users, both in
Though the total rainfall in our country access and management.
is satisfactory, its distribution is highly
skewed. Therefore, rainwater harvesting 4.3.4 The following steps would be taken for
and improving the efficiency of water- augmentation of water availability and
use are important. It has been assessed its efficient use:
that even a 10 per cent increase in the (i) Rainwater harvesting and aquifer
present level of water-use efficiency in recharge would be given priority
irrigation projects may help to provide for ensuring the stability of supply.
life-saving irrigation to crops in large Necessary legislative measures to
areas. Water-use efficiency can be regulate and control the
further enhanced by generating synergy development and management of
with seed varieties, nutrients (macro and ground water would be taken up
micro) and farm implements. The simultaneously.
concept of maximising yield and income (ii) Existing wells and ponds would be
per unit of water would be used in all renovated.
crop production programmes. Water (iii) Demand management through
users’ associations would be encouraged improved irrigation practises,
to gain expertise in maximising the including sprinkler and drip
benefits from the available water. irrigation, and through Pani
Panchayats or water users
4.3.2 The majority of farmers depend on associations would be accorded a
groundwater for irrigation. This high priority.
resource, in which farmers may have (iv) A water literacy movement would
invested their hard-earned savings, is be launched and regulations would
being depleted and the water table is be put in place for the sustainable
receeding fast. Therefore, rainwater use of ground water.
harvesting and aquifer recharge would (v) Integrated and coordinated
be accorded priority for ensuring the development of surface and
stability and sustainability of water ground water resources and their
National Policy for Farmers

6
conjunctive use would be 4.4 Livestock
envisaged right from the project
planning stage and would form an 4.4.1 Livestock, including poultry, is also one
integral part of project of the important sources of livelihood,
implementation. contributing about one fourth of the
(vi) In water-scarce areas, the land-use agricultural GDP. These activities
system would emphasise the engage women in much larger
cultivation of crops of high value proportion. The ownership of livestock
and requiring less water such as is much more egalitarian since poor
pulses and oilseeds. farmer families mostly own cattle,
buffalo, sheep and goats. The major
4.3.5 Symbiotic interaction and convergence constraints experienced by farmers relate
of efforts would be made through to breed, fodder, feed, healthcare and
various initiatives of the central / state remunerative prices for their produce.
governments such as the National There is a need to address these issues
Rainfed Area Authority, the National through an appropriate strategy. Further,
Horticulture Mission, the Technology to enhance the income of livestock
Missions on Oilseeds and Pulses and the owners, agri-clinics operated by
National Rural Employment Guarantee veterinary and farm science graduates
Programme to promote water-use would be encouraged to improve
efficiency and water conservation productivity and overall efficiency of
measures. livestock. At the same time, crop-
livestock mixed farming systems would
4.3.6 For drought-prone areas, a Drought be promoted, apart from encouraging
Code would be introduced identifying production of organic manures and bio-
the action needed to minimise the fertilizers. Livestock insurance would
impact of adverse monsoons and to also be revamped and made accessible to
maximise the benefits of a good all farmers.
season. Similarly, in areas prone to
heavy rainfall, a Flood Code would be 4.4.2 For poultry farming, the following steps
introduced to mitigate distress, take would be taken:
care of the needs of the farmers (i) Quarantine and testing facilities
immediately after floods and help for imported birds and vaccines at
convert the flood-free seasons into all ports of entry would be
major agricultural production periods. established and strengthened, since
For the arid areas, a Good Weather such safeguards are necessary for
Code would be introduced for taking the health and survival of the
advantage of occasional heavy rainfall poultry industry and for the
for strengthening the ecological protection of life and livelihood.
infrastructure essential for sustainable (ii) Testing for safety and efficacy of
livestock production, drinking water imported poultry vaccines before
security and sand dune stabilisation. they are allowed to be marketed,
The National Rainfed Area Authority as is done in the case of human
would provide technical and other vaccines, would be made
support in this regard. compulsory.
National Policy for Farmers

7
(iii) Poultry rearing would be for hygienic handling and other
recognised as an agricultural aspects.
activity and appropriate support (ii) Provision of small dredgers for
would be provided to backyard ensuring the efficiency of fish-
poultry farmers to promote landing centres.
clusters or small holders’ poultry (iii) Centralised services to support the
estates. decentralised capture and culture
fisheries sectors.
4.5 Fisheries (iv) Inland aquaculture, including the
culture of ornamental fish and air-
4.5.1 Both coastal and inland fisheries provide breathing fish, by providing
employment and livelihood to millions necessary space in ponds and
of families. There is considerable scope reservoirs.
for improving the income of fishermen (v) Artificial coral reefs to compensate
families on an environmentally for the loss of natural coral reefs to
sustainable basis by encouraging revive the fish catch.
scientific fish rearing, harvesting and (vi) Raising bio-shields comprising
processing. In the area of public policy, Mangroves, Casuarina, Salicornia,
there is a need for well-planned aquarian Aatriplex and other halophytic
reforms in order to provide landless plants, to safeguard the lives and
labour families access to village ponds livelihoods of coastal fisher and
and other water bodies in the public farm families in the event of
domain for aquaculture. cyclonic storms and seawater
inundation during calamities like
4.5.2 The NFDB has been established by the tsunamis.
Government of India to bring major
activities relating to fisheries and 4.5.4 A dynamic policy for the management
aquaculture for focused attention and and economic use of the Exclusive
professional management. The guiding Economic Zone (EEZ) for a variety of
principles for the NFDB would be economic activities, including fisheries,
ecology, economics, gender equity, will be evolved and put in place with the
employment generation and advising the assistance of NFDB.
state governments to facilitate rational
and equitable allocation of public water 4.6 Bio-resources
bodies and reservoirs for practising
modern aquaculture. 4.6.1 Bio-resources refer to the abundant
wealth of flora and fauna, including soil
4.5.3 Following steps will be taken to promote micro flora and micro fauna, which, after
modern aquaculture practices and value land and water, form the third important
addition: natural resource available to farmers.
(i) “Fish for All” training and capacity Efforts will be made to conserve as well
building centres to impart training to as enhance these resources and to ensure
fisher families and fisher-women in their sustainable use with equitable
all aspects of the capture / culture / sharing of benefits. Two major
consumption chain, quality literacy legislations—the Protection of Plant
National Policy for Farmers

8
Varieties and Farmers’ Rights (PPVFR) efficiency and genetic diversity in
Act, 2001 and the Biological Diversity an effective manner.
Act, 2002—are in place to achieve some (v) Genetic homogeneity enhances
of the above aims. Implementation of genetic vulnerability to pests and
these Acts would be strengthened and diseases. Therefore, pre-breeding
detailed guidelines would be developed and participatory breeding would
in such a manner as to recognise the be integrated to help insulate small
rights of farmers and the farming farmers from the risks of pest and
community. The National Gene and disease epidemics.
Biodiversity Fund would be used to (vi) Launch of literacy movement on
recognise and reward contributions of genetic and legal aspects, in areas
farmers and to support revitalisation of rich in agro-biodiversity such as
in situ farm conservation traditions of the North East, Western and
such communities. A beginning has Eastern Ghats and the arid and
already been made by the government in semi-arid zones.
establishing the Plant Genome Saviour (vii) Genome clubs will be encouraged
Community Recognition Award for in rural schools and colleges for
farmers. imparting an understanding of the
importance of genetic resource
4.6.2 For conservation and development of conservation.
bio-resources, the following would be (viii) Literacy and awareness to help
promoted: tribal and rural families understand
(i) Documentation of traditional the provisions of the PPVFR Act
knowledge through community and the Biological Diversity Act
bio-diversity registers with the with reference to their entitlements.
involvement of women, who hold (ix) Training of farm and tribal
much of this knowledge. families in methods of preventing
(ii) Support to tribal and rural people gene erosion.
for revitalising their in situ farm (x) Conservation of coastal
conservation traditions. biodiversity, including coral reefs
(iii) Participatory breeding procedures and sea grass beds and support to
involving scientists and local traditional methods of conservation.
conservers for improving the (xi) Organise and support herbal bio-
productivity of land races. valleys in the Western Ghats,
(iv) Genetic engineers working in Eastern Ghats, Vindhyas and
public institutions to perform the Himalayan region for the
role of pre-breeding i.e., conservation and sustainable use
development of novel genetic of medicinal plants. In such bio-
combinations for important valleys, farmers would be assisted
biological and economic traits, through venture capital and other
such as resistance to biotic and support to take to conservation,
abiotic stresses, in participatory selection and multiplication of
breeding programmes with medicinal plants of value to health
farmers, to integrate genetic security.
National Policy for Farmers

9
(xii) A nationwide programme will be 4.7.2 Apart from conserving genetic diversity
taken up for the ex situ and in situ and acknowledging the vital role of
conservation of plant genetic livestock keepers, there is a need to
resources at the field / farmer document the indigenous knowledge of
level. Farmer-level gene / seed pastoral communities about animal
banks would be set up in areas maintenance and breeding. Community-
where traditional varieties are in based conservation and development of
danger of extinction. Seed indigenous livestock breeds and species
exchange programmes undertaken will be encouraged, with a special focus
by some state governments, should on both hot and cold arid and semi-arid
take due care to ensure that the areas where genetic diversity and
traditional rice gene pool is not associated indigenous knowledge are
lost in this process. particularly well developed. State farms
(xiii) Participatory management of may be used to promote in situ
national parks, bio-sphere reserves conservation of animal breeds. Grazing
and gene sanctuaries. lands must be earmarked to enable the
conservation of animal genetic resources.
4.7 Animal Genetic Resources Documentation of special biological and
economic traits would be done in the
4.7.1 A system of rewards and incentives will context of the new biological and
be developed to enable and motivate nutritional needs or for other economic
people to conserve their breeds under the traits like hide/leather quality. Creation of
Biological Diversity Act. The disease-secure facilities for screening of
Biodiversity Fund would be used for germ plasm and selection of disease
such purposes. Livestock keepers’ resistant varieties would be promoted.
inherent rights to continue to use and
develop their own breeding stock and 4.7.3 Indian breeds of cattle and buffaloes are
breeding practises will be acknowledged in demand in other countries. Animal
and encouraged. The government will science graduates, self-help groups
recognise these rights, acknowledge (SHGs) and progressive livestock farmers
livestock keepers’ contribution to the would be encouraged and supported to
national economy, and adapt its policies maintain pedigree animals of these breeds
and legal frameworks accordingly so as for exploiting export opportunities.
to protect the same and to pre-empt However, export of all biological material
attempts to use the intellectual property including animals would be in
system to obtain control over animal accordance with the provisions of the
resources. Biological Diversity Act.
5
SUPPORT SERVICES
5.1 Science and Technology can help enhance productivity per unit
of land and water are needed for
5.1.1 Science and technology are the key overcoming the prevailing technology
drivers of change in farm operations fatigue. Frontier technologies like bio-
and output. New technologies which technology, ICT, renewable energy
National Policy for Farmers

10
technologies, space applications and the safe and responsible use of
nano-technology provide opportunities recombinant DNA technology or genetic
for launching an “Evergreen engineering.
Revolution” capable of improving
productivity on a sustainable basis. In 5.1.4 Need-based breeding of crop varieties
order to ensure social inclusion in would be stepped up such as processing
access to new technologies, public quality fruits and vegetables.
investment in socially relevant
agricultural research should be stepped 5.1.5 High level multidisciplinary effort will
up under the umbrella of the National be made for enhancing scientific inputs
Agricultural Research System (NARS) in organic farming that meet the needs of
comprising large numbers of Indian farmers. Integrated crop – livestock -
Council of Agricultural Research fish production systems offer scope for
(ICAR) institutions, state agricultural the adoption of the principles and
universities, all-India coordinated methods of organic farming.
research projects and national bureaus.
Non-governmental organisations 5.1.6 In intensively cultivated mono-crop
(NGO) and private sector research and areas, crop diversification may be
development (R&D) institutions would beneficial from the points of view of
also be included under the NARS ecology, economics and employment
umbrella. NARS would be restructured generation. However, any advice on
so as to effectively address the crop diversification must be
problems faced by small and marginal accompanied by steps to ensure effective
farmers. market support for the alternative crops.
In planning for crop diversification,
5.1.2 The research strategy should be pro- particularly from food to non-food crops,
nature, pro-small farmer and gender such as for the production of bio-fuels,
sensitive. Community-managed seed the food security of the nation would be
villages and seed technology training kept in view.
centres are needed, with women playing
the major role because of their 5.1.7 The intellectual property rights regime
traditional knowledge of seeds and seed will make provisions for compulsory
management, especially in tribal licensing of rights in the cases of
communities. Scientific literacy and research products and processes of value
removal of doubts and fears about the to farmers. In all cases of health and
risks and benefits associated with bio- food security, social inclusion will be the
technology and other new technologies, guiding factor.
can be achieved through farmers
selected in each panchayat and provided 5.1.8 Conservation farming would be given
with adequate training, so as to enable priority in the heartland of the Green
them to serve as farm science managers Revolution and turning the Indo-
in their respective villages. Gangetic Plains into a major food
basket through an appropriate mix of
5.1.3 A National Bio-technology Regulatory technology services and public
Authority would be set up for ensuring policies.
National Policy for Farmers

11
5.2 Agricultural Bio-security 5.3 Agro-meteorology
5.2.1 Agricultural bio-security covering crops, 5.3.1 The nation has considerable capacity in
trees and farm and aquatic animals is of short, medium and long range weather
great importance since it relates to both forecasting. Generic information about
the work and income security of a weather has to be translated into
majority of the population and the food location- specific land-use advice, based
and trade security of the nation. An on cropping patterns and water
integrated National Agricultural availability. The agro-meteorological
Biosecurity System (NABS) covering advisories issued from time to time,
crops, animal husbandry, fisheries, would be used by Panchayat-level
forestry and agriculturally relevant functionaries, trained to give appropriate
micro-organisms will be established with land-use suggestions to farmers with the
the following objectives: least possible time lag. For marine
(i) Safeguard the income and fisheries, data on wave heights and
livelihood security of farmer location of fish shoals available would
families, as well as the food, health be transmitted to the fishermen.
and trade security of the nation, Frontline technologies such as internet-
through effective and integrated FM/HAM radio/cellphone services
surveillance, vigilance, prevention, would be very helpful to fishermen in
and control mechanisms designed to this regard.
protect the productivity and safety
of crops, farm animals, fishes and 5.4 Climate Change
forest trees.
(ii) Enhance national and local capacity 5.4.1 Climate change leading to adverse
in initiating proactive measures in changes in temperature, precipitation
monitoring, early warning, and sea level is an emerging issue. Most
education, research, control and experts agree that the impact of global
international cooperation. warming has been in a worrisome
(iii) Introduce an integrated bio-security measure, as evident from the melting of
package comprising regulatory glaciers and Antarctic and Arctic ice
measures, education, improved caps. Coastal storms and cyclones are
sanitary and phyto-sanitary also increasing in frequency and
measures and social mobilisation. intensity. Consequent to these changes,
(iv) Organise an integrated national droughts and floods are likely to be more
agricultural biosecurity programme on frequent. Although climate change is a
a hub-and-spoke model, with effective product of unsustainable consumption of
home and regional quarantine facilities non-renewable forms of energy, the
capable of insulating the major agro- harmful impact of climate change will be
ecological and farming system zones felt more by those nations with limited
of the country from invasive alien resources and coping capacity.
species of pests, pathogens and weeds Proactive measures to reduce the
as well as from the introduction and vulnerability to climate change will be
release of Genetically Modified taken. Based on simulation models,
Organisms (GMOs). contingency plans and alternative land-
National Policy for Farmers

12
use and water-use strategies will be established for this purpose. Soil
developed for each major agro-climatic organic matter would be increased
zone. In drought and flood-prone areas, by incorporating crop residues in
experienced farmers would be trained as the soil. Proper technical advice on
“Climate Managers” in the art of the reclamation of wastelands and
managing drought, flood and aberrant on improving their biological
monsoons. potential will be made available.
Fertilizer pricing policies will be
5.5 Inputs and Services reviewed to promote balanced use
of fertilizers. Agro-forestry will be
(i) Seeds: Good quality seeds and encouraged for efficient nutrient
disease-free planting material, cycling, nitrogen fixation, organic
including in-vitro cultured matter addition and for improving
propagules, are essential for crop drainage. Appropriate production
productivity and security. Hybrids and marketing mechanisms for
are now becoming available for bio-fertilizers, organic manures
many crops. In the case of new etc. will be put in place to promote
varieties, foundation seeds would their use for improving/
be provided to grass root level maintaining soil health.
seed growers and their groups such (iii) Pesticides: The triple alliance of
as cooperative societies and SHGs. pests, pathogens and weeds is the
Mutually beneficial farmer-seed cause of substantial crop losses
company partnerships will be every year. The development,
encouraged. Agricultural introduction and diffusion of
universities would be encouraged environmentally safe and effective
to organise courses on seed pesticides will be given priority.
technology and business, and There is a need for incorporating
mainstream business principles in the use of chemical pesticides in
all applied courses. A national an Integrated Pest Management
seed grid will be established to (IPM) system. Suitable quality
ensure supply of seeds across the control, safety evaluation and
country, as per the area specific other regulatory systems would be
requirement. strengthened. The sale of spurious
(ii) Soil Health: Soil health and substandard pesticides would
enhancement holds the key to be prevented and bio-pesticides
raising farm productivity. Steps would be promoted.
would be taken to ensure that each (iv) Implements: Farmers need region
farmer is issued with a soil health and crop specific machines and
passbook containing integrated implements for timely sowing,
information on the physics, management of weeds and
chemistry and microbiology of improving their post-harvest
farm soils with corresponding operations. Women especially
advisories. More laboratories to need woman-friendly implements /
detect specific micronutrient tools which can reduce drudgery,
deficiencies in soils will be save time, enhance output and can
National Policy for Farmers

13
be handled comfortably. Agri - characteristics; upgrading of breed
entrepreneurs including farm through artificial insemination;
graduates and progressive farmers cross- breeding suited to the
would be encouraged to provide farmers’ resources; and improved
implements and tools, machinery, processing and marketing. The
tractors and other farm implements livestock sector has to become
on a custom-hire basis. sanitary and phyto-sanitary
(v) Vaccines and Sero-diagnostics: compliant. A cadre of para-
Major gaps in the presently veterinarians would be trained to
available facilities would be filled set up support service centres for
in the case of important animal the farmers, to promote early
diseases. Bio-technology research detection and treatment of diseases
in the area of vaccine development and other veterinary services.
would be stepped up, encouraging (ix) Support Services for Women
public private partnerships. Empowerment: For capacity
(vi) Fish Seed and Feed: Good quality building and livelihood, women
and disease-free fish seed holds working in the farms need
the key to successful inland appropriate support services like
aquaculture. Progressive fishermen crèches, child care centres,
and their groups such as SHGs nutrition, health and training, etc.
would be trained in induced fish For funding such activities,
seed breeding, production and existing schemes of the Ministry
availability of seed and fish seed of Panchayati Raj, the Ministry of
feed at affordable prices, with Rural Development and the
appropriate technical assistance Ministry of Agriculture would be
from the NFDB and other augmented and utilised and new
agencies. schemes would be introduced, if
(vii) Animal Feed: Inadequate required.
nutrition is the primary cause of
low milk yield in dairy animals. 5.6 Credit and Insurance
Both conventional and non-
conventional approaches for 5.6.1 Improvement in the outreach and
conversion of cellulosic wastes efficiency of the rural banking system
into good animal feed through is the need of the hour. Towards this
appropriate treatment and end, the financial services would be
enrichment, planting of nutrition galvanised for timely, adequate and
rich fodder plants and easy reach to the farmers at reasonable
dissemination of technologies interest rates. The banking system
would be encouraged. would endeavour to meet the large
(viii) Other essential support services: credit potential needed to raise
These include establishing genetic agriculture to higher thresholds and
evaluation systems for indigenous for the growth of rural and agri-
breeds as well as crosses, so that business enterprises and employment,
selection can lead to genetic and would take steps to achieve
improvement of production financial inclusion.
National Policy for Farmers

14
5.6.2 The Government of India has already put 5.6.4 There is also a need for credit and
in place an agriculture credit policy to insurance literacy in villages. Gyan
improve access of farmers to institutional Chaupals (village knowledge centres)
credit. Steps would be taken for extensive can help in this task. Awareness on
coverage of farmers under the Kisan credit and insurance issues among
Credit Card Scheme. Micro credit and farmers would be promoted.
micro insurance will be promoted as an
effective tool for encouraging production 5.6.5 Women need special attention in credit
and reducing risk. Credit cooperatives access because of their lack of land
have an important position and role in the title/collateral. Kisan credit cards would
rural financial system and priority would be issued to women speedily with joint
be given to reforms and revamping of pattas for homestead / agricultural land.
cooperative credit institutions as per the For the cases without joint pattas,
recommendations of the Vaidyanathan indemnity bonds / guarantees from
Committee. Credit counselling centres husband, and relatives would be
would be established where severely considered by the banks for extending
indebted farmers can be provided a debt credit and kisan credit cards to the
rescue package/ rescheduling to save women farmers.
them from a debt trap. National Bank for
Agriculture and Rural Development 5.7 Cooperatives
(NABARD), as the leader of agriculture
and rural credit, should facilitate 5.7.1 Cooperatives have an important role to
convergence between credit availability play in banking, input supply, marketing,
and credit absorptive capacity of the agro-processing and other agri-
farmers and other rural borrowers and an businesses to protect farmers from the
efficient credit delivery system. vagaries of existing imperfections in the
NABARD should actively involve itself supply of inputs, production, value
in institution building and provide backup addition and marketing. Cooperatives
support through research and should function as economic enterprises
development initiatives. NABARD and not as an extended arm of the state.
should function like a national bank for They require an entrepreneurial
farmers. approach, competitive edge through
suitable enterprise focus and strategic
5.6.3 Since agriculture is a high-risk economic alliances with private and public sector
activity, farmers need user-friendly units. Appropriate mechanisms would be
insurance instruments covering put in place so that farmers have greater
production, right from sowing to post- control of the market channels and
harvest operations. The insurance should improve profit opportunities through
also cover the market risks for all crops, cooperatives and SHGs.
in order to insulate the farmers from
financial distress and in the process 5.7.2 With economic liberalisation and market
make agriculture financially viable. competitiveness, cooperatives would
Steps would be taken to revamp the require much larger capital and other
National Agricultural Insurance Scheme financial resources. Changes in the legal
to make it more farmer friendly. framework and regulatory system would
National Policy for Farmers

15
help gain greater access to farmers, processors, retailers and other
capital/financial resources. The policy stakeholders together to support
and legal framework under which modern agricultural practices.
cooperatives are functioning would be Convergence of extension efforts
reviewed so as to create an enabling especially at the district level and
environment for them to attain autonomy below would be ensured.
and run their operations in a business -
like manner, subject to provisions of 5.8.2 The potential of ICT would be
law. The management of the harnessed by establishing Gyan
cooperatives needs to be made Chaupals in villages. Further, the
professionally competent, with clear common service centres of the
demarcation of functions of the elected Department of Information Technology,
members and the managers. The audit Government of India and those set up
and accounting systems would be by the state governments and private
improved and made transparent so as to initiative programmes will be evolved
give greater confidence to all the for inclusive and broad-based
members of cooperatives. development. Thus, the structure of the
ICT-based knowledge system would,
5.8 Extension, Training and Knowledge inter alia, include setting up of such
Connectivity village centres. Last-mile and last-
person connectivity would be facilitated
5.8.1 The gap between scientific know-how with the help of technologies such as
and field level do-how has been broadband internet, community radio,
widening in the recent years. This or internet-mobile phone synergies.
knowledge deficit would be overcome
speedily to enhance farm productivity 5.8.3 Empowering farmers with the right
and profitability. Krishi Vigyan information at the right time and place is
Kendras (KVKs) would take up essential for improving the efficiency
training and lab-to-land demonstrations and viability of small and marginal
in the area of post-harvest technology, holdings. Mass media, particularly the
agro-processing and value addition to radio, television and local language
primary products to provide skilled newspapers, will be used to play an
jobs in villages. State governments important role in this regard.
would be supported for strengthening
the extension machinery through 5.9 Social Security
retraining and retooling of existing
extension personnel and for promoting Coverage of farmers, particularly small
farmer to farmer learning by setting up and marginal farmers and landless
farm schools in the fields of agricultural workers, under a
outstanding / progressive farmers. The comprehensive national social security
farm schools with linkages to KVKs scheme is essential for ensuring
can speed up the process of livelihood security. The government
technological upgradation of crop and would, therefore, take necessary steps to
animal husbandry, fisheries and agro- put in place an appropriate social
forestry. Efforts will be made to bring security scheme.
National Policy for Farmers

16
5.10 Agricultural Prices, Marketing and (vi) Terminal markets for agriculture
Trade would be developed in public-
private partnership mode to
5.10.1 Assured and remunerative marketing provide better market access to
opportunities hold the key to continued farmers with better price
progress in enhancing farm productivity realisation in a transparent trading
and profitability. Several significant environment with suitable
market reforms have already been backward linkages to give
initiated by the Central and the State technical backstopping services
governments. These reforms provide needed for quality and demand
more options to farmers for selling their driven production.
produce, allowing the private sector, (vii) The role of the Agriculture
including cooperatives, to develop Produce Market Committees and
markets, promote direct sales to State Agriculture Marketing
consumers, processors and retail chain Boards would be transformed from
suppliers / exporters and remove scope mere regulatory focus to
for corruption and harassment. The promotion of grading, branding,
following steps would be taken: packaging and development of
(i) The Minimum Support Price markets for local produce.
(MSP) mechanism would be
implemented effectively across the 5.10.2 Farmers require authentic advice based
country. on meteorological, marketing and
(ii) The Market Intervention Scheme management information for land-use
(MIS) would be strengthened to decisions and investments. Infrastructure
respond speedily to exigencies support would be put in place to
especially in the case of sensitive minimise post-harvest losses and enable
crops in the rainfed areas. agro-processing and value-addition at
(iii) The establishment of community the village level itself to increase
foodgrains banks would be employment and income. Farmers’
promoted to help in the marketing organisations and other entities like
of underutilised crops and thereby cooperatives and small farmers’ estates
generate an economic stake in the would be encouraged so that farmers can
conservation of agro-biodiversity. get a fair deal and enjoy the economies
(iv) The food security basket will be of scale. Producer groups and
enlarged by storing and selling cooperatives will be encouraged to
nutritious millets such as bajra, promote agro-processing industry.
jowar and ragi and other crops Constraints would be removed for
through the network of the Public improving the negotiability of
Distribution Systems (PDS). warehouse receipts.
(v) Efforts will be made to develop a 5.10.3 The trade policies in agriculture would
single national market by relaxing aim at protecting the livelihood of
internal restrictions. All controls farmer families and fostering their
and regulations hindering increase economic well-being. Effective
in farmers’ income will be livelihood security for farmers would be
reviewed and abolished. put in place. Quality and trade literacy
National Policy for Farmers

17
programmes would be launched across levels of the farmers. Therefore, it is
the country. Appropriate measures would necessary to integrate their production
be introduced to mitigate price risks and with processing and other value chain
enable the stakeholders, particularly the activities. However, the post-harvest
farmers, to hedge their risk. infrastructure in the country is grossly
inadequate, resulting in huge
5.10.4 Farmers’ associations and SHGs would inefficiencies and wastages. The
be supported to export on competitive percentage of post harvest losses at
terms by spreading awareness of the various stages of storage, grading,
opportunities available for external packing and marketing due to improper
agricultural trade and for value addition. handling and transportation, vary
The agri-export zones would be further greatly, depending on the nature of crop
strengthened to become places where and climatic conditions. The food
farmers will get the best possible price processing industry has the potential to
for their produce. provide long-term economic
sustainability to the farmers by adding
5.10.5 The twin goals of ensuring justice to value to their produce, improving post-
farmers in terms of a remunerative price harvest management linking the farmers
for their produce and to consumers in to the market and promoting demand-
terms of a fair and affordable price for driven farming. Further, the food
staples (as farmers are also consumers) processing activities also need
would be achieved through the following modernisation. Hence, effective steps
integrated strategy: would be taken to facilitate and stimulate
(i) The government, while taking this process, modernise the food
decisions on MSP, would ensure that processing sector and enhance its
the farmers’ interests in receiving competitiveness.
remunerative prices for their produce
are adequately safeguarded. 5.12 Curriculum Reform
(ii) Stable and efficient market
environment, including effective 5.12.1 Agricultural / Animal Sciences
implementation of MSP in rainfed Universities: The motto of these
areas, would add to the universities would be to groom “every
improvement in productivity and scholar/student as an entrepreneur”. This
income in dry land farming. will call for integrating business
management principles with major
5.10.6 The terms of reference and status of the applied courses. The agriculture/farm
Commission for Agricultural Costs and universities would also restructure their
Prices (CACP) would be reviewed to curricula in a manner that the gender
make the MSP regime more effective. roles in farming are recognised and they
are equally empowered technologically.
5.11 Integration with Processing and Value There is a need to restructure the
Chain curricula to focus on nutrition, post-
harvest technology, quality and safety
5.11.1 It is well recognised that value addition standards. The farm universities would
to agricultural produce increases income be reoriented to give emphasis on
National Policy for Farmers

18
entrepreneurship and capacity building of Management (IIMs) would be
on quality including sanitary and phyto- developed to enhance the
sanitary measures and Codex competitiveness of the graduates. Taking
Alimentarius standards of food safety. into account the new opportunities
opened up by ICT, pedagogic
5.12.2 The mandate of the ICAR would be methodology for promoting a learning
expanded to provide for registration and revolution among students would be
accreditation to the farm graduates as adopted. University centres would also
registered farm practitioners to provide establish employment and business
quality service to the farmers. Centres of advisory services and promotion centres
excellence in agriculture (crop, animal and special one-stop windows for
husbandry, fishery and forestry) generating awareness of self-
modelled after the Indian Institutes of employment opportunities.
Technology (IITs) and Indian Institutes
6
SPECIAL CATEGORIES OF FARMERS
6.1 Tribal Farmers (v) Provision of appropriate technology
and extension services and relaxed
Tribal farmers are among the most criteria for providing inputs such as
disadvantaged category of farmers. A water, fertilizers, seeds, etc. for
majority of tribal communities across the tribal areas.
country are dependent on forests and
animal husbandry for their livelihoods. 6.2 Pastoralists
These include cultivation (shifting
cultivation in many cases), collection of The following steps would be initiated to
fuel, fodder and a range of non-timber ensure better livelihood opportunities for
forest produce. Uplifting of their pastoralists:
economic conditions would be a priority (i) Restoration of traditional grazing
for the government. For this purpose, the rights and camping rights in respect
following actions would be initiated: of forest areas and in those areas
(i) Updating land records in areas earmarked for grazing purpose in
inhabited by tribal farmers. village common lands.
(ii) Strengthening the institutional structure (ii) Formalising entitlements (including
to enable a more participatory process issue of permanent grazing cards)
in decision making. for traditional pastoralists/herders
(iii) Easy access to institutional credit to maintaining native animal breeds to
all tribal farmers and adequate enable free access to notified or
provision of kisan credit cards for demarcated grazing sites and
them. migration routes.
(iv) Documentation of the traditional (iii) Grazing land and drinking water
crops and knowledge of the tribal sources for livestock will be
farmers and creating an economic conserved and expanded to the
stake in conservation of such crops. extent feasible.
National Policy for Farmers

19
(iv) In-depth documentation and 6.3.3 Island Farmers
characterisation of indigenous
livestock breeds and preservation The farming and fisher families in the
thereof would be carried out to Andaman and Nicobar Islands,
recognise and protect the Lakshadweep group of islands and other
intellectual property rights of the islands need special attention including
local communities / individuals technology, training, techno-
conserving these livestock breeds. infrastructure and trade. Island
(v) Pastoralists would be involved in all agriculture also has the problem of
local natural resource management transport costs, particularly for
programmes, including village perishable commodities like fish which
forest committees and joint forest may have to be sold in the mainland.
management. The ancient tribes of the Andaman and
Nicobar Islands have rich traditional
6.3 Other Categories knowledge and wisdom. Steps would be
taken to recognise and reward their
6.3.1 Besides the above two groups, there are indigenous knowledge in the areas of
several small groups with distinct and biodiversity conservation and traditional
special needs such as small plantation healthcare. Horticulture development
farmers, island farmers, urban farmers programmes would be taken up in
and organic farmers. islands wherever feasible. The creation
of mangrove and non-mangrove based
6.3.2 Plantation Farmers bioshields would be initiated to
safeguard the lives and livelihoods of
A large number of small farmers are island populations in the event of the rise
engaged in the cultivation of plantation of sea levels due to global warming and
crops like tea, coffee, rubber, cardamom, calamities like tsunamis.
pepper and vanilla. Price fluctuation and
competition from products imported 6.3.4 Urban Farmers
from abroad are among the major
problems facing them. Therefore, the In urban areas, home gardens and
Price Stabilisation Fund for plantation nurseries would be encouraged.
crops will help them to be insulated from Nutrition gardens would be supported to
the vagaries of the market. supplement the nutritional requirement.
7
SPECIAL CATEGORIES OF FARMING
7.1 Organic Farming scientific support than chemical
farming. KVKs would be equipped
The organic farming movement in to provide training in organic
India suffers from a lack of adequate agriculture. Internationally accepted
institutional support in the areas of certification procedures would be
research, extension, certification and strengthened to make them farmer-
marketing and it requires more friendly and affordable. Organic
National Policy for Farmers

20
farming zones would be identified, 7.3 Genetically Modified (GM) Crops
like the hill areas, islands where
chemical fertilizer use is low, and for There is a need to assess the risks and
medicinal plants where the use of benefits associated with GM crops in a
chemical pesticides and fertilizers is credible and transparent manner.
not advisable. Organic farming would Priority would be given for genetic
also be encouraged in selected modification to incorporate genes which
rainfed areas backed up by required can help impart resistance to drought,
supports, including marketing. It salinity and other stresses. Water-use
would also be supported through efficiency as well as improvement of
contract farming. Food safety and both nutritive and processing quality
quality specifications should conform would also be accorded priority in the
to the Codex Alimentarius standards research agenda. Training and awareness
since there are occasional reports of in agronomic management procedures in
heavy metals being present in organic respect of GM crop varieties would be
foods. Farmers engaged in organic introduced.
farming should be linked to niche
markets where they will obtain a 7.4 Protected (Greenhouse) Agriculture
premium price. Progressive farmers
and farm graduates would be With the rapid growth of
supported for establishing agri-clinics horticulture, there is an opportunity
and agri-business centres for organic for greenhouse cultivation of
farming. Bio-fertilizers, organic vegetables, fruits and flowers
manures and bio-pesticides would be supported by economic methods of
treated at par with the chemical water and fertilizer use such as
fertilizers for support and promotion. fertigation (the application of
nutrients through irrigation systems).
7.2 Green Agriculture Support would be given to farm and
home science graduates and other
Green agriculture involving integrated entrepreneurs to undertake green
pest management, integrated nutrient house horticulture under the agri-
supply and integrated natural business programme and horticulture
resources management is recognised development programmes. Low-cost
as the pathway to an “Evergreen green houses, along with micro-
Revolution”. Unlike organic farming, irrigation and fertigation techniques,
green agriculture permits the safe and would be popularised in areas where
minimal use of mineral fertilizers and evaporation exceeds precipitation
chemical pesticides, as well as crop during several months in a year.
varieties developed by genetic Suitable support would be given for
modification. Green agriculture such technologies that would
products would be encouraged with increase income in water deficit
distinct labelling and certification as areas.
in the case of organic farming.
National Policy for Farmers

21
8
SPECIAL REGIONS
8.1 Distress Hotspots 8.2 Mega Bio-diversity Areas
Several steps have been taken by the Local communities would be involved in
government to mitigate agrarian distress the conservation of mega bio-diversity
experienced in some parts of the areas such as Western and Eastern
country. It is important that special Ghats, eastern Himalayan region, other
attention is paid to such areas to reduce North East and tribal areas. These
risk and promote inputs for sustainable communities would be given an
agricultural practices. In such areas, incentive and their contributions would
knowledge connectivity, social support be appropriately recognised. Steps
systems and marketing infrastructure would also be taken to enable local
will be strengthened. Convergence of the communities in mega bio-diversity areas
benefits under different schemes would to convert bio-resources into economic
also be encouraged. wealth in a sustainable manner.
9
FARMERS OF THE FUTURE
9.1 The slow growth of opportunities in the enlightened self-interest. Other
non-farm employment sector has led to forms of service cooperatives are
the proliferation of tiny and slowly emerging, but the pace needs
economically non-viable holdings. to be accelerated. Small farmers’
Increase in small farm productivity and cooperatives would, therefore, be
creating multiple livelihood encouraged and supported to take up
opportunities through crop-livestock activities such as processing, value
integrated farming systems as well as addition and marketing of agro
agro-processing would be supported for products.
increasing farmers’ incomes. Methods (ii) Group Farming by SHGs: SHGs
of achieving economies of scale by small for supporting micro-enterprises
and marginal farmers through the operated by women with the help of
farming groups would be popularised to micro credit have been highly
enhance yield and income. Women successful. With the growing
would be encouraged to participate in diminution in the size of operational
such group activities. The following are holdings, it will be useful to
some of the methods which may benefit promote SHGs and commodity-
the small and marginal farmers for based farmers’ organisations at the
gaining efficiency and economies of production end of the farming
scale in their farming operations. enterprise by encouraging groups
(i) Cooperative Farming and Service for consolidating farming activities.
Cooperatives: These have been This will be particularly helpful in
successful in the case of the dairy the case of “Green Agriculture”
industry. Marketing cooperatives involving integrated pest
are successful since members management, integrated nutrient
cooperate on the basis of supply, scientific water management
National Policy for Farmers

22
and improved post-harvest helpful to small producers in getting
technology. SHGs would also be good quality inputs, fair prices and
promoted for improving access to prompt payment for their produce.
credit. A code of conduct for contract
(iii) Small Holders’ Estates: The farming or a model contract will be
formation of small holders’ estates, developed to meet the commodity-
for example, in cotton, horticulture, specific requirements. Farmers will
medicinal plants, poultry and not be alienated from their land
aquaculture will help promote group under any circumstances under
cooperation among farmers living in contract farming. State governments
a village or watershed, or the may set up a monitoring committee
command areas of irrigation involving farmers to encourage a
projects. Improving productivity, farmer-friendly contract farming
reducing the cost of production and system.
entering into marketing contracts (v) Farmers’ Companies: Private
with textile mills, food processing limited companies, registered under
industries, pharmaceutical the Companies (Amendment) Act,
companies, and fish marketing 2002, are now coming into
agencies will be some of the existence in the area of seed
advantages. Such small holders’ production, the production of bio-
estates can also manufacture fertilizers, bio-pesticides and other
products under brand names and forms of biological software
enhance income security so that essential for sustainable agriculture.
group insurance becomes feasible. Small farmers and the SHGs would
Agri-clinics and agri-business be associated in such companies as
centres would be linked to such stakeholders and not just as
estates. shareholders.
(iv) Contract Farming: Symbiotic (vi) State Farms: State farms inter alia,
contracts which confer benefits to would also be used for developing
both producers and purchasers Living Heritage Gene Banks of the
would be encouraged for ensuring germ plasm of local crops and
assured and remunerative marketing breeds of cattle, sheep and poultry
opportunities to the farmers. in order to preserve the plant and
Contract cultivation based on a animal genetic wealth.
well-defined code of conduct will be
10
ATTRACTING YOUTH
Educated youths would be helped and in different aspects of agricultural and
supported for setting up agri-clinics and allied activities including value addition
production-cum-processing centres to and processing of agro-products shall be
undertake outsourcing jobs both from introduced and recognised. The KVKs,
within and outside the country. In order institutions of state governments/ICAR
to attract youths to the agriculture sector, and competent private institutions may
a number of vocational training courses also provide such recognised vocational
National Policy for Farmers

23
training to the youth. Trained persons ventures for value addition to improve
would be supported through various productivity and income of the farmers.
schemes to launch self-employment
11
OTHER POLICY MEASURES
11.1 The following policy measures will also (v) Farm families would also be
ensure well-being and livelihood protected from becoming victims
security of the farmers: of HIV/AIDS and tuberculosis
(i) Existing state land use boards (TB). Anti-retroviral drugs would
would be revamped and linked to be made available in villages free
district-level land-use committees of cost. The approach to the
to be constituted by the state treatment of farmers who are
government so that they can victims of serious diseases like
provide quality and proactive HIV/AIDS and TB in villages
advice to farmers on land use. would take into account access of
These are expected to emerge as the patient to food and nutrition to
virtual organisations with the assist recovery and restoration of
capacity to link land-use decisions productive life.
with ecological, meteorological (vi) There is a need for a rural non-
and marketing factors on a farm employment initiative for
location and season-specific basis. farm households. The initiative
(ii) Major thrust would be given to the would bring all rural non-farm
development of floriculture, roots employment programmes together
and tuber crops, aromatic and in order to generate convergence
medicinal plants, bee-keeping and and synergy among them. A
sericulture. Appropriate market consortium approach involving the
linkages would also be provided so different agencies concerned
that such efforts would improve would be adopted.
employment and income (vii) Along with production growth
opportunities in rural areas. rates, income growth rates would
(iii) Market Intervention Scheme also be measured and published.
would continue and would be Improving income and livelihood
strengthened. Suitable measures of farmers would be incorporated
would be taken for expeditious as a primary objective of all
processing and sanctions. schemes implemented in the
(iv) A well-defined food security policy agriculture sector.
with homegrown foodgrains is (viii) Article 243 G of the Constitution
important for eradicating rural (73rd Amendment) Act, 1982,
poverty and malnutrition. In order entrusts panchayats with the
to strengthen and regularly monitor responsibility for agriculture
food security issues, the government including agricultural extension. If
would constitute a Cabinet the problems faced by farmers are
Committee on Food Security. disaggregated and dealt with by
National Policy for Farmers

24
the gram sabhas and panchayats, mass media with timely and
location-specific problems can be scientifically accurate information
attended to speedily and on issues relating to agriculture,
effectively. In order to implement food security and farmers welfare,
various schemes and programmes regional media resource centres
at the grass roots level, the would be set up, associating
Government of India would farmers, media representatives and
support state governments for scientists, including extension
devolution of functions and personnel.
functionaries for empowering the (x) There is a need for integrated
panchayats. Steps would be taken approach for rural energy where
to strengthen and accord centrality renewable energy systems /
to panchayats in addressing the devices, biofuels would be
problems of farmers. promoted apart from improving
(ix) Mass media (conventional, the rural infrastructure, including
electronic and the internet) rural electrification, which is
constitute an important pillar of essential for agricultural
our democratic system of development.
governance. In order to assist the
12
OPERATIONALISATION OF THE POLICY
12.1 The National Policy for Farmers will be policy address the problems of the
adapted and operationalised to suit the farmers.
local needs in different states and union
territories. State governments would be 12.2 The Department of Agriculture and
supported to convert national goals into Cooperation would constitute an Inter-
local action points by preparing Ministerial Committee to suggest a plan
operational plans for implementing this of action for operationalisation of this
policy, taking into account the agro- policy. Appropriate mechanisms and
climatic and other local conditions. Such guidelines would be evolved by
operational plans will be prepared at the concerned Ministries / Departments to
district level by a multi-disciplinary implement this policy.
professional group and integrated at the
state level. States would be encouraged 12.3 The Agriculture Coordination
to have an effective mechanism for Committee under the chairmanship of
continuous feedback from the farmers to the Prime Minister would oversee and
ensure that measures taken under the coordinate the integrated implementation
of this policy.
***
National Policy for Farmers