Wa Ao Sto Wei0-33003/99 REGD. NO. D. L.-33001/99

Che Gazette of Gudia

EXTRAORDINARY
amt I—avg 1
PART I—Scction 1
wife @ werfyra
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY

a
a 275) ag faccit, mart, faarat 7, 2012/aTHETATT 16, 1934
Na. 275] NEW DELHI, FRIDAY, DECEMBER 7, 2012/AGRAHAYANA 16, 1934

Tarn Wa sate Wael
(siwa fram)

BRET
ag feeeh, 7 fears, 2012

faaa: wela sirafe qea Pratror aif, 2012 ( wrataitt-2012 )

WH, @. 31011/16/2012-Gisms-.— 1,1 andra aise vela am, she, WA ad waTeT aM
RIAA Pa verei S fre aT ura & aie aH 1990 4 Fao Ha Varet WMT 5,000/-
ay WAY Fed wT ar wt at 2009-10 4 ager WH TG os HN ET NA ate a A THTes
FR Ue] AAR BT TAT 62,055 SYS VAY HT Uae shy 42,154 ars way & Pata wfta g
LAT Ml Site G ue vela faxed 4 cagal an drew wad Fe UNI VET t TM Fea HH gfe
feza FY gaan i4at wis @ | Pree Fe gw aes G ore @ fH ude cagai fara J wa aA
Fer Tet cagat Sl cane, geo aage ey A fafoen wReal w waa awa 4 aagal at wa
Fea Wes TI ETS |

1.2 det oman & ae atefa (ea wera) sree, 1962 cen aitefl (ama frdau) aex,1963
@ rar @ Roa: oa 4 aiteftral a vec ae yeu Pram wore ary at AE 1 a ones ARG
Ren aaa a oni weanfte fry wT 2 | ga oneal S cRoraa: steal S Aer 1 ata, 1963
@ RR a ay | gas ae ea 4 fats fetal G ore we ww WR we Aes Prada wonferat
fet anes SURG afergioa at ag Rrra aor S Piso af safa atk yea G Adan a we
dea sige Hea a ape ae-eeae Tea et | a ere: attef Stra (Pram)
arew, 1966, aieft ara (Fran) anes, 1970 9 firs anazas ag afafray, 1955 3 ais
ate a sraae aegt afta ox srazae ag afafias, 1955 & anita ord fear aa en |

4530 GL2012 (1)


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part I—Sec. 1]

gud Vale she +S, 1978 silk sitet “fa, 1986 Ma | S ag aiteha ana (Fran) sew,
1979 cat ashy ata (Pram) see, 1987 ad fey ae 1 a wh feat qeaa: areas siefiai
wa ae 4 cep sis we Adan ay we sik ural wore Bikaa oe & ftaia Ww
araa of waits gad wa A ard ward ware at gfe @ fay, Ade sal saa B Y_s OI
& faq wre vet wt Gerd we ar A fear Ura YET EI

1.3 wa aisfa aaa (Prada) arey, 1995 art wen aria ada alee Af, 1994 ark
Raat Pte ot aah 23S wer 4 ory at as eft | ge A A Ger we O ai Prd bg
fagia amare aan en ae ydadt Heal SV waka wa Aa or | get Ra aise ot Ga
aa Rf o wRter 4 Afr ache 3 aa sta A auRafea ofie ance S GUN WR
aisfal uz amaRa daa Peso HA aa oa ag et ga vor w aivital wm ota Pram &
ae 4 ara aan en RAS ade A Soh A Ha fot we fw aH eh ak oh varaai a
ara ait va aR as SB aie on pel wR Pram Sr ane Uae A @ WA UATE
qa wel at i ag Ga ae ge at I ae 1994 at At S acl GS aU 74 aH
aaa fat sean am 1577 8 Ht aaa Pada wont G oni cra 7M at 1 ge aha
ada ay Wool, wg anya ok fore 3 aeam S vents steftal, anf S Wd A YEG
fay pe amare Ht oRafera 2 |

a 2000 3 cha anf yore a ay ots ver waar 7a RR a gy aise Aa A wT
faaet Pea (waderd) siierie we 3 GARY aM war aie geet ah 100% ae aa & 7 |
gad ag af sist yea Paka aie af 2002 4 ary a 7g fred uty aaa Pah w sina
fran st aa a ate afte vex arm Tal aad Priam G watorll & fey ga SER Gt
Brat Bl 4.00 aes BAT D TarTaK 25.00 atts wa aR fe wa on ate aa sit @ AEST GT
ah fz VaR AAMT TAT en | A wa stele, fore are Fea 2.00 way 3 sits TH a, wh
na Pda 3 ceva Pere Ra aa a) Re ade oe Rome, Ae TS vere wonfe
ane & ake okra sisal aA ws AS ag of 1 cenit, ste fs, 2002 a aries var
wares Soak Gag At i aates wea waa 9 Rais 12-11-2002 S at aie & aN
ga MRS oralwaa W BOM ores TTS aR feat oT MGR A Fa ea GT Gaara
aiid Q oh ate Geran amare 4 Rais 10-3-2003 & owt one S VARY FA RI ae Sl
Pret ax fear an wig Aa fre agar 7a aad feat a :-

man 2 f& Rais 15-2-2002 A 4A A oie wa fat oreT | weak, eH aE Fee ca S fe
atetrat aa Peau & arax S Tex aa TA oy sik arta aera Fae A Pee fear fH 2
ag, 2003 aq gHagae wen vier ws wen Oh aisha A wien wt ay”

Sean wares 3 ata S mete 4 ze Pie fea a fm ag aie ae Paka Aha
dan @ arg afk aaqaR ade HS, 2002 af A anata sé A ag cer aiisf “fe, 1994
ary Wa ak aaa AT] |

14. sf Ge wean soars & oeden fee feel S ogee wed Farag A aT 1996 F
gftrafia qiadt usta onavaa car yh 4 fea cereal Sh qa at wanda fea | ga Ueilfta
aa aA A Tavedys, 2003 S ew 4 aftrafe far vay | aay 2004 4 WER


[3M I—ere 1) a AR BI UATT = Soe

mo

7 WT MASH, AGA sayy, Slo Wg VA Ht seman A va wrlaa Ft wear a at Prac
ier wre alvat wre ae & fey free tar en | a a ot at atefret ot amae
Wvegey, 2003 en oh va wa seat el oft 1 moe BH UA A Revae 2005 F aa
Rear mega at 1 sive Gere aca Pater at aby Ae aH Geter ArT ERI ox Rania
wr @ | set ata at 2011 4 tarea taraa 3 wages delta we St at ae wreaeey-2011

aftyfa Bt | ue vedere € f vein ay flere & fe wel waa ag AAT tenet Sa!

Ter aaa owt ot gait or yaw oe ale gad wee wnat Area he aad >
oat ot sft yer Ww sitetat cite ae & fee wre wy tet ale aAat sag wg
& | fafa cen cere feet fed S fa tigen oe oe aera 4 we aide art ¢ dete
serrate fect ar datattre cent sik ast } wer qeata farm 2 |

1.5 gafey wht @ fay afta qeat oy snazae eagat woe ae ita teax wea Pifear
qen arm & afta ver a dgtta ee o we-we urate onfte anit wa vel A gah

grits oe S cer St oe war a ze | dap onl aaa Fo weetee sitet:

aioe eit are der at ng gaifeal ar arr ot aan site AR Ww Be oh gage
aaa St I St arewraaat St ET Se sS fag ate A, 1994 a deta wear a anagem

w

@ | Sd: WOR Vege wety ale yor Faker sey, 2012 (yritini- 2012) a waa wet

@ forerd frerax 1994 4 vfeufea asf Aa at “abstr ate 1986 # dahea” site +H, 1994
ant wirenfte at at Hirer wt wy s | TrH-2012 ved 1994 F ahha AA Dw A a |

16 0 wete asf aoa Raho a, 2012 4 adam 4 ea wreg ak oRae seam dare,
UNG WON at feria 8 YA, 2011 S va ten 12-01/ sneer zat /08 Siew S arr
Mita “IIT sae sat yh, 2011” 3 fteia a genfta oA S Sha vier ae Mita wt
at wire at ae 2 | .

17) Vara saat St sree 3 vel 4 tare oRaal GH Jeax vga aa & fae tema
ated ore sem 8 YS Waraad Aa & ake dae fee wet ak wad ae we Ba cet
Mia GH are URI ERI Mtr far we |

Sree GAR wer Tran Ef seit H Ae oat Are aaa wd cha ay
SRT Saga STE ATS Gaia aia A ora uRaa dS wee | ah 1904 a ater
, Sie @ scinre eaen & chert wet ot araeaeren ¢ | ae ae é fe ott a ae Pree

By Prarra Tere wt Ro wt oy ames weit a mas H wera B Pre sare ile
sierra By wate orawe SS weer ofa WR Ww ores eae - ‘onaere care

1 Gea Sera OT wey eres wel a fey Aators ile onfkhes amet ab wer wer Are oT

Wee cereal wor are Ae eat Haile Peereptes ao Ree nar |


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part I—Sec. 1]

3. wet ala aoa Puke fe (weritihh)- 2012 4 sya feaia

waa sie yea Raker Ae (Taiihh)- 2012 4 ae } fran dg WAG

(1) ateftal ot snaana

(2) Sde OreRM S Acai ant Paar
(3) aaron za Pura

3.1  weta oie aca Roku iS, 2012 4 Pika ateftal S edi an fePraas abate
a waded & ome w fea wien | ae siefa Ae, 1994 4 aera aa anfite
FAA @ GR FA WHR s :-
(i) Fra 2012 & ani aia & faq “onaana” & ARs TH fa Waa-
WAT We Ua cen eet A A TaeA aan Rae Hew Hae, ARA WER ant afta
wag saya Sa Bel wy fae as a a wad s |
(ii) wea ta aahiena (Siivare) ent afed fares or aia |ERt VAUeISTA
wl seal wae an ah w asa Ya, PRA wel St ae a
(iii) preston & bt cope € re er ar ee er ec ofc
ert 1
(iv) Wyesys 4 seat sist a a den 4 ant a aga gaa wt a wah
Aral 4 TARA woe BS reo B fay ex Was Wal GT ata SI
(v)  arrita Seas =arera 3 fasts srqafa afaa eT 3668/2003 (ARa a ATA
Ses, TNE IR ora) ee 9 Rete 105-2008 & ot ore a at
wmardmal Wy act fear s fe“... aa afar fe aaa ak vic
so cole ram 9 get A my fear ox ah vita ands dar
aa Ws FS TAA Hl Sad By slayer sta U Walda ada Rea A wRad eA
a sarana & fe vavades, 20114 adheg 348 eagaitddar 34 wag a
“gigi (arta fram) ames, 1995 (Saisi, 1995) A werq ae 4 yiwe 74
sista Fs

3.2 weta oiefa qeu Pek fe, 2012 4 sftafaa cagal G yea an faraat Saat
urfeerl & qeal & fahrara @ ane oe feat are | ae staf He, 1994 F anmag wg
APs sen otefdl cen Sd SREMi S aR S Aas S qladi Praia BPS |
“Sie OR” @ For Fras @ sa Reid Gl AM BG GRO FA WHR & :


[= I—ave 1] Ba BT TAT : AA B)

ssn
(i) ze fis wen afeft-whang (afha oteft wen) S arate site wie ot se
Sea fica & hh AAs order & Pio ingen Weng A eda water
aren “graze” We aE vRafea vet at Beard = fers cit a ann wea
uftaal srexdl & Pre “qnaeaena” GAM UT WHT F SAT wel |
(ii) ama § awn aie ww ge eh aa WS fr we fe OT IE
gisfrat ar Prior Roar aT A ora are AA ww SRT Ss | Aga: Sinhsh,
1995 at wan arqaet 3 afttafea 74 aes aint 4 8 daa 47 aw aisha oi
aa SAIN OTe Ra ace aisha MPa wrgeri we geeT Ser wT WIE
Pras SA WHR St WHS GT Greta WK FT waa wt é | arta Wh ga wihar A
faata wa S wafaa Bye |
(iii) aon afee of rides eet 3 yea Refer on ord aga Gia Bt oT ST OTH
cot waa erat # Prat Saaee AF ter are zal aa SH aif sie Ge ora
RSE - FAS Ten Teal S A aon aisha a Ais - B Aer Yo aaa 4 guenfaa
Bes |
(iv) daa unicast & om 4 aca Pda & attra earg om haga Te fae Tea
Praker afiaua eat é ot eee ant fay wy oft Hisar cream & sre
& Pa Fé laa Wa 2a G fay ae veg shang afta wea & wel Caer sik
Mt & Aa Yar G1 ATS sas |
(v) dt aa ois Rain Pas qa Ww aw aie deh eet & Tafey
pata wit waita ae aa S WI W alge Ba GT alam ea sl A TST
gruct 3 frog oot an gad et ore S eaten Tames sel Bla |

3.3 usta ala qe Peter A, 2012 4 atefral @ yal or fara wt aR
anata yea Puke (wadhh) 3 afty orga o yeti & far G craw w erm |
ag ata AR, 1994 d anda arra omnfta yer Pah ahh) @ uy Aral S ferro

(i) ara erate yea Prisca 3 ania stefadl & ect aA wer at ERT St

card aa & Aral AAS war 3 afta siest A onaamat eet S| gas fay Paice

S star wi url Sh 38 oeaids Rega as Va FI Paka sins & = fie

argfia eens Bien & ik sree Prafensit ERI soon fate wt fear ure S fora

aom-arert Pratarsit ert fey TR atest St WAG WR aM Vara ot Ulead Vid OMT

2 ofa Borer S| ACER Gers & Re wgan sichhal S ona W Tae SIT

dat Fi gies 4 va ot wat cI

(ii) aan amata aa Raker & atrfa ara Peter serene Pain @ URW
aA are ates A gen A adaie aa J ame wa TE TT

Wee oq a Fr ep fen TA ee st Pee
3° GAL


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY (Paxt I—Sec. 1)

(iii) ama anata yea Raker & ants gs wore S oni feet viens fee wt
argent & Rafa yeti or fake “Paar aa ves” one w ea s
safe Ga Ae Wail ds A wehitra oa at ef Teh S | FAN sma FI

eax wy fart aU Wes @ wte & fay oda F ore Tel Tech & | ROTA: fret soe

ag 3 aces arian oily witerel wee Tae |e 7 a omica- wh & fag ak

a & sein at wate & fag ores € |

(iv) anda sloren qo: Ta watta & Ras we A Aid val o I
eater & aa Nass wr Prakeor anaw Rafael cen atone ater ERI aia Gl

Sra GT a Wea, Sarr B WG ERI we BAAS WHat 8 Pia: FS Be!

ara ane AR wT Pek wet ee wT SST Mel A Re wad TET
emt haa § Priam S ania 7 a8 8 ok waa Paken Ga To A To areal ENT
Sar & arama & ciftpt eth ote somal otk Gefala & cheat wal arate faphval ot
cre Prag eH A ven A vere Bia wer Pea salad S are 4, wd ga aT wt
Sw 8 ga wT | chai wage 3.2(ii) 4 aera TH SL ra Tal GS TA WA
Sririst, 1995 @& ania atqiia cee oefrdt & orem aitefaat ar Pein ery aT
cet fer CURES caret A ou w oh ap site geil aA sens ae SHS
sid ua TPR waa WEA | eas Rae waa ve rare we A ORT aTaT we GAVIA:
sei ar aaa A wanda A wet é sik ae aaa GT ear A Pee sel GX TET eT
ag 2015 aes orden cen ort oft ext A bee S atex AF ach arr 300 fatera7
arate Sta Fea BH <a (@raiclittrera <agal wd) S wert Pats A Saree a
aa Fel Gor WGA | wenfta ae HR A, rad aeq afta Aca Pei feat aie,
prom fered Roa: 3 ara 4 wfoerel or oh UT eT |

(v) rigger Sanish & onda wh stata ew ateeal ok orfeeri) & Fad qe
2s ida 3 ug er St wg & BH wey hong aw GH Gaal wied weafed Her 4 Ve
at & Be RR GA, safag welts aie GT ATG afaked Ward erm |

4, renin: 2012 4 sitaftal 3 apa Pedant ud Ruler eg Raid

aaa Gata SWAG we eh “Tete sneer eT BA 2011" 4 OTE TIE!


(3m I—ars 1] Sa Bl Wa : AAT

(iii) aaa Prim A oaft CayegyH2011 A aenphee qual ie coc &
arpa ert |

(iv) CATE Sarge BI Get TOA FAAS 1% B siflaw aN Ga AA ATA ata

(ara wifes Ga fi B TU) TA WH ate or TMT ed Ter SATE WATTS

zargdi aa afters Apa Paita wet ot ard wefa We fee Ty WS qa et :
(aa cag A A TTA eA B 1% B sft eT 1% F ATS ATTN aa

anct cag BWA ait WH aaa a ain) (eas S WI sist wT Tae aa aa

fahratasit at oot Wem)

(v) cafarerat zat Her Pree saftorar ea(eeth) oa weed Gi fer og | Pesta Set
SS SMa HUTT BAS GA HT Gee B Ay as HT aT TT @ fay wads
Sh 1 Sh or Prater Gee wy omen a eT TaTERTA-2011 FH NITE
sadehageyarn Hears TA G STAR

(vi) aftean ARI wr Pak cent ore w atter oe aa aa ane
gieel (waar) BS ate W fea WIT | we Ay gaa dale BK W
erat Gaal AETHER (METALS) HURT ITA IHS UT | wrazaeren

wien ud Apaiar G area S a vA | Ble agra aie U Kifei G WK

fader & ai @ AA 16% @ ae add DG ooh ais orheast S fay aM

at via | often ea Preven TT UG |

Wil) ot oteftat onferee sis Soa € was waa A evikhy sins wes
BATT |

(viii) fra afutrit @ vida A winwet S anna a aah Aas ah as GS TH el

rch, rae GA ware H erga oH are cargat & qeu 3 wan wierd oll ATT

Brit |

(ix) caeeden H alta Reh cord ARiy anrara Hea (RNA) ETE GT eT ETT

fama URenar AE Tesla ate ea Prefer aif ar mart cart & fer we  6weta

STATE steet S oT oR fora ore @ | fers sitet a ama 4 agqaga 4 aay

Rraa athe & Us FE Ved OT TSG ies @ STE WR TER sihad Fea aT Faker

fea uae | ga WHR fr aiatray @ fae wera ate qe oiest ate

| Wo a creer aitea Fea an Prefer ew we Gra ofa Tale oie seTH &
RA @ Gad SHER Was Gras oA Aittehet HET |

(x) sights AR an dada fm ae zen afigfad ete yer Gea G AIAN
euet2011 4 AR wa S aR A ate fe A ope 4
Sieh | eae fre det as 3 wa A wets ad DT | otter H ote Fad we


THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part I—Sec. 1]

ATM SINR lana a awa fads ude ps Ye 4
gfe at Uta aH ary Feu 4 Wiener Get & fay wa: S mira ert 1 afe
de yu yuan 4 frre ant ga afte pat aeqeraet =o onfieh ak wae
at i eitig twte at lotaat fa dager aq dita sear ai wa
gem 4 ata am, ska fet arta | dalffa afktoas Aaa S oe ASI wa
fay a ad writiy sé eiffel ea @ fou afta Gag GMT |
(xi) wag St Ha ao fast - Me sea FI HI TT aS fu dei gas -
Var wierd B sitter sera Gash aweaN aU sta (aa Tita oa fast w aa OR)
oR Wy uRads a we saat, wd Sar ow after AR Fas alta
Sen Tel far aIET | Va FoI SH aK OW Oataas Aral A Waher 5 awl aS
fe srg | cent, ate fret fees cag Gl aa Ua 45 Ww GS da 4
wei |
(xii) yeu Praam fits sitaftai : ahger yea Pram wore & siete teraz sisal
@ Foal at ahea at unit c ak ae oF aiefkal GS qeal A ws aE A 10% S
ate fe eet é at ofava areal @ ois WS Be Wa Wht carga @ AR oT
waa-wag W Paka ae € | wenfta Ae A wt oases asa aa Prada S
Aeat we frre war & fey ze weave & fe Oh carga & acai a Praha ome we
Fidtefia A ony, siz wei 34 Fea AF 10% ate B afte at ax a ge a a az
WO Hl Ue Med eh fe ae grasa G yeu HI ammey-s«d12: HEA @ fay aA
ae Fa UMA S Aha ae |
(xiii) smnfta situfal ; ores Hiv) 4 Ru oqER Ps wot Sonia ot a
siafra’ & fay Raita afd yer anna carga A ary eA | Pat woe
SUM AM eit saad carga H fry stem U sileaa yea Ta TNT fey TTT I
(xiv) Shikhst, 1995 ak wavagva - 2011 & dtu aftara aieitai : ot ailsftai
Sasi, 1995 or at am Ss cet Vay - WIL A Gig ews AW
ver ag & fry fax wer ak Gad we VareeTa G PA aa cagal at TRE H 10%
afte at afinda gfe at arqafa a ore |
(xv) Yee atta : tee sist SB A a sf wa SG fay Tar s 1
wreat, 2007 3 onta ga ata we yaw wife & ah tee obvi S aa
Poko & dae 3 Pete wie a Rema a omen we fear org |
(xvi) BE 2 AAER aR agian cen flora w aa SS fey Prafefea sisal at
fret at aR at yea Pretaor were S aex Wal GIT :
(@) Fata era veriea at GA are WA ag sited Gh adie tee sfaras, 1970
Wel arpa Gen fara w Ae SG Ba a a ae sitalB wa ar = afifern


awn tee

THIET Yo a aH ath B via ad Gaal S ae 7 Pram @ we wt at qa
ert |

(a) cet 4 fate ger series GH Ory arch Vet stele Ser AF ary aftroaes were ao

TRH ot ata U vie ae & fey aca Fria @ we wa at oa Shit ras wae oat
tée afar, 1970 (sane te) d aris fon wea wy |
(71) BRE] OTHE cen fore S HeaH S Poke as vere wore ae writers aR
Font ao apiet at ata @ via af ot raft & fre gee Aretar a BMS

(xvii) For Pram & wo Y waeses on wees ve asia wfka # ak ered.
wer WRaR seam Harare at free ue aie aa Ream ante F ania
orfed F vargas 4 arg A ailef® entra at or aadt 3 |

(xviii) Yor Pram ary et un & are vagedya atetal sik order Sb vere RR

SAH) Seek Tea Sat gett 4 Fra wt at ase vd aibse feart ae yfafera

oem fe sic da ER CT ER RRR Wo Flas | owaweder A aA

guet ak aed act fort wiveger ats ar até APafar waveiea ailwA at amg

Fayeeya attefe srr thevaventea alsftr & we waa ard ser at

They ate ot cra ote geet a Rat aed ve ae ails ata wen dat

faPratar 8 orten at ore fe qe ag cleft ota at 8 ad ue B yee oT agties

WIT Hel

(xix) toned cen oRar wean ate silvia a Gate ait @ Peer ost aed
ot afer war ox far ae | . ;

(xx) UM sivf® fat Set quanged aefta GaRe cage S ae a wonch a aes

Ol Si et Heer dea S | gud afaRadt WA orbits & afte ona & fre aeta

faftocat criseat cr enfter arate | s8 ar ay weer wRart wea utaat oral

Geran em fit & pe ga yor és:

(i) tarea: oRaal sore? we one dr Gar S GT wee eT yRaat work &

URG Treg oReat woreht ar eae aed aaRay wr weet ere Raat wore year
US 30 64))2-3 | SO, | as

”


THE GAZETTE .OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Parr I—Sec. ]J

(i) fas wa @ tiga cen vive uRari & fey Sa teh, vasa te on det
(ii) afer yea w qrargad ateftai at wie a yeaa ae & Are wear art
wer, Weg a wh wet wei a ay eft | aed ¥ wer a
cargat wt aoe Ute & fay aera ok ore civ whe HA Sumer sy ates

a weraat fret | |
(iv) or sist aries & ay =a ara wrk sae ot grea aed thats arett
4 ores sileftrat afta qea uy ada ae or aa | |

(v) ae amit at aaqaz 2011 4 orga at a§ ara & fue ae erez

Preteen 4 snper ayant Fear wah sil arore arepell at ARR TARY F aft arent Fr
We vd cagal at yore Yaa a oad | gad aie GE wT ww omen a
warez cReat wore & oniiy ate at wie & after Pear d afte als® wie
Wet H seit crear Yse fear a

(Vi) Ware we ora a sit fafherefiet at cet da, cer ais a

wae steal & aera aeais aaft slvet a iemea wer Sat S fer
WARY TAT | ,

(vii) fT ome wh S went fae wr a maa ka S AS ma wat s Ae

silvia ar ya wart dg fasts ea or eral

(viii) sbvitg tat a enc oer oo

(ix) Perfetti asi 4 sitee sett a ygg wet 2g wUE HET:

(®) ate Ferre wore wt Yge TART Ten Bee TMT

(@@) ater amet, da sive, date wet an deo a wie et
faPrartes wiftepeit ar vas a oe OAT

(7) oa ert silk faeaftereai & ay whe che ox aen ws teh, gee yh

fare ther a raat ote vd sara site wernht worst ah sheen | ah attache

ara & arqeena cen feerea wr aera ear | .

(a) aR steatiyciget vd GR aa et mia at ag Rey abefe
waa Hr aaet sar .

(s.) ateft weit at atest at yy ax? tg fie wo ageapt ash a ana
Rar fears a sera Say

(a) siehrat oe oy are Gene Yost a aera sar
(8) aitey fora ure, silva perex watt & ae ger seen a eee wel
onfes aitser seth ¥ otenpa we vat at yee ale gitar wae ot wd


I

(a) sive gan amor a gfeeRira sar va Sie ong Os wT YgE TT |

ue sagas & fie ga wh Ri eR & wT ore fart w we Wee fos aT
2012 Ht URA S aay aes Paka G ved dw via war GET | _

6. aad

ag A A of S ae ay sea (Gea Adam) one we Tad Sy
artrgfta Reran ore | ast sia eT Praeer stoner ae fe & fore cer A aitafa
(Gra Prian) ante & fox orcas wider am | yathhiy wt stieia Woda a
Agta wera A aret afte we GR vin ak Reel Tas Boag aa a aria a
fahrama wore at adenati Barges oRepa fear Tg |

MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS
(Department of Pharmaceuticals)
NOTIFICATION
New Delhi, the 7th December, 2012
Subject : NATIONAL PHARMACEUTICALS PRICING POLICY, 2012 (NPPP-2012)
4. PREAMBLE AND BACKGROUND

No. 31011/16/2012 PI-ll.— The Indian pharmaceutical Industry, driven by
‘knowledge, skills, low production costs and international quality products has
witnessed a robust growth from the production turnover of about Rs. 5000 crores in
4990 to over Rs1 lakh crore in 2009-10 comprising about Rs, 62,055 crores of
domestic market and Rs. 42,154 crores of exports. It is, globally, the 3” largest
producer of medicines by volume yet 14" in terms of value. The lower value is due to
the fact that Indian medicines are amongst the lowest priced in the world. However,
despite this medicine costs continue to be an important component in the overall

medicare expenditure in the country.

1.2 Price control over drugs was first introduced in the country in the

aftermath of the Chinese aggression with the promulgation of the Drugs (Display of


is)

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY (Part I—Sec. 1]

Prices) Order, 4962 and the Drugs (Control of Prices) Order, 4963. These were
promulgated under the Defence of India Act. With these orders, the prices of drugs
were frozen w.e.f. the 4* April, 1963. Thereafter, a series of price control regimes
were notified through various Orders in the country from time to time based on
different principles, in which the span of control of prices as well as the nature of
control of prices varied from Order to Order as per the disposition of the respective
Drug Policies. These were the Drugs (Prices Control) Order of 4966, the Drugs
(Prices Control) Order of 4970 - issued under the “Essential Commodities Act 1955 by
declaring drugs to be essential commodities under the EC Act, 1955. Thereafter the
Drugs (Prices Control) Order of 4979 and Drugs (Prices Control) Order, 4987 were
issued following the declaration of Drug Policy, 4978 and Drug Policy 4986. All these
Policies were broadly based on the principle of effecting control over prices of
essential drugs and later bulk drugs, as well as availability of drugs while at the same
time attending to the requirements of the indigenous industry for growth cost effective

production, innovation and strengthening of capacity.

1.3 The present Drug Policy of 1994, as implemented through the Drugs
(Prices Control) Order, 4995 was introduced in the context of the liberalization of
economy and the abolishment of industrial licensing, as well as allowing of
foreign investment in the country, including in the drug industry. The principle for
price control broadly adopted in this policy represented a radical departure from
the earlier policies. This envisaged control over prices of drugs on the basis of
economic criteria as represented in the market share of different companies in
the context of total market sales turnover of various drugs. Thus, those drugs were

brought under the ambit of price control, where the company turnover was of a


(am l—as 1) ORG ITA 2 AAU

particular level and where the market share of leading producers was beyond a
particular level. The control over prices was to be on the basis of the cost of
production with allowance being given for post production expenses. As per the
criteria of 1994 Policy, a list of 74 bulk drugs was identified and these drugs as well as
the formulations based on these drugs (currently about 1577 in number) were brought
under the price control regime. Certain exceptions such as for small scale units, drugs
produced through indigenous research and development, etc were envisaged for

exemption under the Policy.

1.3.1 In the year 2000, further liberalization in the economy was effected, in
light of which, Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in the pharmaceutical sector was
brought in the automatic route and the limit raised upto 100%. Following this, a new
pharmaceutical pricing policy was introduced in the year 2002 which further liberalized
the span of control over pricing. The turnover limit for purposes of price control was
raised from Rs. 4.00 crores to Rs. 25.00 crores and the parameters of market share
were also relaxed further. All drugs where unit price did not exceed Rs. 2.00 were also
-excluded from the ambit of price control. There were also exemptions given for drugs
developed through indigenous R&D, New Delivery Systems etc. The 2002 Drug
Policy was, however, challenged in the Karnataka High Court, which by order dated
12.11.2002 issued stay on the implementation of this Policy. This order was
challenged by the Government in the Supreme Court which vacated the stay vide its
order dated 10.03.2003 but observed as under:

“we suspend the operation of the order to the extent it directs that the Policy

dated 15.2.2002 shall not be implemented. However we direct that the

petitioner shall consider and formulate appropriate criteria for ensuring
US Be 46]12-4 .


4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Paxt 1—Sec. 1]

ee ese SS aoaoOoouom

essential and life saving drugs not to fall out of the price control and further
directed to review drugs, which are essential and life saving in nature till ad

May, 2003”

1.3.2 In the light of the order of the Supreme Court, it was decided that a fresh
Pharmaceutical Pricing Policy be formulated and accordingly, the 2002 Drug Policy
was never implemented and the 1994 Drug Policy continued to be applicable and
continues till date.

1.4 Meanwhile, in accordance with the guidelines of the Supreme Court
above, the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare revised the List of medicines in the
National List of Essential Medicines (NLEM) earlier notified in 1996. The revised list
was notified as NLEM, 2003. In November 2004, the Government also set up a Task
Force under the Chairmanship of Principal Advisor, Planning Commission, Dr. Pronab
Sen to look into the issue of price control options other than price control and other
issues and to make recommendations for making available life saving drugs at
reasonable prices. The basis of drugs to be considered was the NLEM, 2003, being
the latest list at that time. The Pronab Sen Committee submitted its recommendations
in September, 2005. The revision in the existing policy of pricing of pharmaceutical
products has been under consideration at different levels. In the meanwhile, in 2011
the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare revised the NLEM and notified the new NLEM,
2011. It may be noted that various drug policies adopted from time to time have tried
to cope up with the challenge of striking a balance between the at times varying
requirements of enabling industry to grow and at the same time ensuring affordable

and reasonably priced medicines to the consumers, particularly the poorer masses.


(am I—avs 1] A Al UA : ATT

This balancing of diverse and conflicting interests is indeed a difficult task, as is the
reconciling of short term interests with long term goals and concerns.

1.5 The Government is therefore seized with the goal of enabling industry
growth with attendant socio-economic benefits along with balancing the declared
objective of providing better health care including making available essential
medicines at reasonable prices to all. The Drug Policy, 1994 needs to be revised to
meet the challenges brought about by the competitive international pharmaceutical
industry in a globalised economic environment, as much as meeting the country's
requirements for safe and quality medicines at reasonable prices. Therefore, the
Government hereby enunciates the National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Policy, 2012
(NPPP-2012) which seeks to replace the Drug Policy enunciated in September, 1994
as "Modifications in Drug Policy, 1986” (Drug Policy 1994). The NPPP-2012 is in

continuation of the Policy announced earlier in 1994.

1.6 The National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Policy 2012 presently seeks to
limit itself to the central objective of promulgating the principles for pricing of Essential
Drugs as laid down in the “National List of Essential Medicines - 2011 which was
‘declared by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India vide

communication No.12-01/essential medicines/08-DC/DFQC, dated 8" June, 2011

1.7 Other related and required steps for promoting growth of the
Pharmaceutical Industry as well as development of new drugs including patented
drugs, along with institutional mechanisms for better access to healthcare in the
context of availability of medicines in general, would be formulated separately through
a wholistic policy and thereafter adopted by the Government after due consultative

process.

2. OBJECTIVES OF THE PRESENT POLICY

OBJECTIVES Or INERT SS

15


16

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Paxt I—Sec. 1]

As stated above in its present form, the Drug Policy of 1994 needs to be
modified in the context of changed global environment for industry as well
required changes in the mechanism to make available essential medicines to the
masses. The objective is to put in place a regulatory framework for pricing of drugs
so as to ensure availability of required medicines — “essential medicines” — at
reasonable prices even while providing sufficient opportunity for innovation and
competition to support the growth of industry, thereby meeting the goals of
employment and shared economic well being for all. The reasons are further

elaborated later in the Policy Document.

3. KEY PRINCIPLES OF NATIONAL PHARMACEUTICALS PRICING POLICY
2012

The key principles for regulation of prices in the National Pharmaceuticals Pricing

Policy 2012 are:
(1) Essentiality of Drugs
' (2) Control of Formulations prices only
(3) Market Based Pricing

3.1 The regulation of prices of drugs in the National Pharmaceuticals Pricing
Policy 2012 would be on the basis of essentiality of drugs. This is different from the
economic criteria/market share principle adopted in the Drug Policy of 1994. The

reasons for the adoption of the principle of “Essentiality” as a key criteria are:

(i) The “Essentiality’ criteria for drugs under the NPPP-2012 is to be

met by considering the List of medicines specified in the National List of


Essential Medicines as revised from time to time and most recently
declared by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of
India.

(ii) The NLEM has been prepared by an Expert Core Committee
constituted by the Director General of Health Services (DGHS) out of the
WHO model list of essential medicines, Essential Drugs Lists of various
States, medicines used in various National Health Programmes and
Emergency Care Drugs.

(iii) The NLEM contains such medicines that satisfy the priority health
needs of the country's population.

(iv) The NLEM medicines are required to be made available within the
context of a functioning health system at all times in adequate quantities in
the appropriate dosage forms to serve large public masses.

(v) The Hon'ble Supreme Court in its Order dated 10.03.2003 in SLP
No. 3668/2003 (Union of India Vs. K.S. Gopinath and others) has also
emphasized the need to *..... consider and formulate appropriate criteria for
ensuring essential and life saving drugs not to fall out of price control...”
(vi) The current principle of economic/market share criteria needs to
be changed now, given the fact that out of the 348 medicines listed in the
NLEM-2011, only 34 drugs are included amongst the 74 drugs listed in the

First Schedule of “The Drugs (Prices Control) Order, 1995 (DPCO 1995).

1 3.2 The regulation of prices of drugs in the National Pharmaceuticals Pricing
Policy 2012 would be on the basis of regulating the prices of formulations only.
This is different from the earlier principle of regulating the prices of specified Bulk

usaeghlig-es


18 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA: EXTRAORDINARY [Past 1—Sac. 1}
the Drug Policy 4994. The reasons for

Drugs and their formulations adopted in

adoption of this principle of price control of “Formulations Only” are:

(i) That the Bulk Drug - API (Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient) - may
not fully reflect the ‘Essentiality’ of the actual drug formulation — Now the
subject of focus - due to the possible applicability of the API in
manufacture of various formulations which may of may not be
considered “Essential” for the larger healthcare needs of the masses.

(ii) = The emphasis on price control starting at the bulk drug stage itself
has in recent times, resulted in amongst other reasons shifting of
manufacture of drugs away from the notified bulk drugs under price
control. In fact only 47 bulk drugs out of the 74 notified in the First
Schedule of the DPCO, 1995 are now under production. This has had a
cascading effect on the formulations manufactured from the concerned
bulk drugs which in tum has affected the availability of such
formulations. The consumer-patient has been adversely affected in the
process.

(ii) = The task of pricing both the bulk drug and the formulation makes
it complicated and time consuming without commensurate direct benefits
to the consumer who is actually affected only by the price of the final end
product, i.e., the formulation - made from the bulk drug rather than its
bulk constituents.

(iv) The price control in the form of formulations only ensures more
‘ specific pricing control of the required medicine which is in the interest of
the consumer from the point of view of the actual prescription by the

Doctor. This aspect is more important for a country like India where


(art I—arzs 1]

UR Al TATA 2 AAT

19

a eeae—e—c=coacccoaoovovr

3.3

there is large asymmetry in the information between the doctor and the
patient.

(v) Since the bulk drug manufacturer is constrained to sell at a fixed
price, the manufacturer is always likely to give preference to an existing
buyer rather than to a potential new entrant. This constrains the
emergence of new companies and formulations in the price-controlled
segment and is inherently anti-competitive and also does not benefit the

consumer-patient for the same reason.

The regulation of prices of drugs in the National Pharmaceuticals Pricing

Policy 2012 would be on the basis of regulating the prices of formulations through

Market Based Pricing (MBP). This is different from the earlier principle of regulating

the prices through Cost Based Pricing (CBP) under the Drug Policy 1994. The

reasons for adoption of this principle are:

(i) Under Cost Based Pricing, the prices of drugs have to be
calculated in detail every year which requires a complex variety of data.
For this, the manufacturers are required to provide their pricing data in
an extremely detailed manner which is intrusive and so highly resisted
by the individual manufacturers resulting in possible manipulation and
time delay of provision of the base costing data. This also makes it
difficult to properly check the data provided by individual manufacturers
in a timely and adequate manner. Additionally the data can vary in
terms of production cost depending on technologies used for production.
(ii) | Under Marked Based Pricing, the pricing would be based on

widely available information in the public domain as against individual

-


ee ets

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part I—Sec. 1]

manufacturer level production costing data which would result in more
transparent and fair pricing.

(iii) | Under Cost Based Pricing as the controlled prices of formulations
of a particular API are determined on a “lowest common denominator”
basis, they tend to be clustered within a narrow band. This allows
virtually no space for a new entrant to come in at an uncovered price
point. As a result, production activity and competition in the product
segment tend to stagnate. This is neither good to the consumer-patient
nor for industry growth.

(iv) The Indian economy is today largely market-driven and,
particularly in the area of pricing of manufactured products, prices are
determined by market conditions and market forces. Administered
prices exist in a few areas, such as pricing of petroleum products and
procurement prices of food-grains but these are closely connected with a
regime of subsidies paid by the Government. To determine the price on
the basis of costing, particularly where the inputs prices themselves are
not subject to any form of price control and are determined in the open
market by market forces, would indeed be anomalous and would, in the
medium and long term, lead to severe distortions, particularly in the
product-mix and investment patterns in the industry and there could be a
serious possibility of production moving out of controlled drugs into non-
controlled drugs. As indicated in para 3.2(ii) above, this has, amongst
others, been a factor in the shifting of manufacture away from bulk drugs
notified under the DPCO, 1995. This would have serious implications for

the availability of NLEM medicines in the future and for the growth and


(am I—ars 1]

4.

Ud Al UAT : AAT

structure of the pharmaceutical industry as a whole. Further the resultant
implications of this on the growth and innovation may also impact the
industry's ability to invest in enhancing in capabilities to capture the
export potential likely to open up on account of the almost USS 300
billion worth of drugs (including biological drugs) falling off patent in the
US and other western countries upto 2015. In the new policy, where
Ceiling Prices will be fixed, there would be ample space for
manufacturers to position themselves in an appropriate price band below
the Ceiling Price thereby also retain competition in the market.

(v) Since the prices fixed of all drugs (bulk & formulations) under the
existing DPCO are envisaged to be frozen for one year in the policy with
increases allowed up to WPI, the impact of the policy will be an

additional impact.

INCIPLES FOR DRUGS PRICE_CONTROL AND DETERMINATION IN

PRINCIPLES FOR DRUGS PRICE CONTROL (Xn SS

NPPP-2012

Price regulation would be on the basis of ‘Essentiality’ of the drug as

laid down in the “National List of Essential Medicines - 2011” declared by the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, and modified time to time, in public

interest under Drug Price Control Order.

Price regulation would be applied only to formulations, i.e. the

medicine actually used by the consumers, and not to any upstream products

such as bulk drugs and intermediates.

U$a0qg71a-C

21


8

meee eee

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY {Paxt I—Sze. 1]

(ii) = The Span of Price Control shall be as per the dosages and strengths
as listed in NLEM- 2011.

(iv) The methodology of fixing a ceiling price of NLEM medicines, by
adopting the Simple Average Price of all the brands having market share (on
the basis of Moving Annual Turnover) more than and equal to 4% of the total
market turnover of that medicine, will be as per the formula below:

(Sum of prices of all the brands of the medicine having market share
more than and equal to 1% of the total market turnover of that
medicine) / (Total number of manufacturers producing such brands of
the medicine)

(v) The formulations will be priced only by fixing a Ceiling Price (CP).
Manufacturers would be free to fix any price for their products equal to or
below the CP. The CP’s would be fixed on the dosage basis, such as per
tablet / capsule / standard injection volume as listed in NLEM-2011.

(vi) The Ceiling Price will be fixed on the basis of readily monitorable Market
Based Data (MBD). To begin with, the basis for this readily monitorable
market data would be the data available with the pharmaceuticals market
data specializing company — IMS Health (IMS). Wherever required this data
would be checked by appropriate survey/ evaluation by the National
Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA). As the IMS data gives price
figures for stockist level prices hence in order to arrive at ceiling Price (which
will be the maximum retail price), the \MS price will be further increased by
16% as margin to the retailer so as to arrive at a reasonable ceiling price

chargeable from the consumers.


(am I—avs 1] Sa Hl UTA : AAU B
(vii) For drugs not in the IMS data, NPPA would collect data by
commissioning the same.

(viii) For the medicines where there is no reduction of price due to
absence of competition, the overall percentage reduction in the price of
same molecule with other dosage and strength will be applied; otherwise the
overall percentage reduction in the price of medicines in the same
therapeutic category will be applied.

(ix) The CP for a drug listed in the NLEM would be the Simple Average of
Prices as calculated on the basis of IMS data six months prior to the date of
announcement of the new National Pharmaceutical Pricing Policy i.e the
“Appointed Date” for bringing the new Policy into effect. For a drug whose
data is not available in IMS, the NPPA will commission the data within a
reasonable time for determining the Simple Average Prices also on the basis
of prices prevailing six months prior to the Appointed Date. Thus the Simple
Average Prices data date for the drugs available in IMS data and collected
by NPPA would be same. Once the Simple Average Price is fixed, NPPA
would monitor its implementation on a continuous basis through a proper

methodology and system.

(x) The prices of these NLEM-2011 medicines will be allowed an annual
increase as per the Wholesale Price Index as notified by the Department of
Industrial Policy & Promotion. It is proposed to fix the 1° April of every year
as the reference date for this. Accordingly, on 4% April of every year,
companies will be automatically authorized to revise their prices upto the
limit of the increase in the Wholesale Price Index for the previous year. In

case of decline in Wholesale Price Index, a corresponding reduction in the

*


Wa 1) oO

2a THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part I—Sec. 1]
ceiling price will be obligatory. The NPPA itself will also separately notify the
revised ceiling prices as applicable as on the 1° of April each year, and in
case any company has fixed the prices not consistent with the revised ceiling
prices, the NPPA will take appropriate action to have these revised.

(xi) The Simple Average Price of all the brands of the medicine having
market share (on the basis of Moving Annual Turnover) more than and equal
to 1% of the total market turnover of that medicine - the Reference Prices for
calculation of Simple Average Price - may also change on an annual basis
due to changes in the MAT value. However, there would be no annual
revision of Ceiling Prices on the basis of MAT. Revision of Ceiling Prices on
the basis of MAT value would be carried out only once in five years or as and
when NLEM is updated/revised. However, the Government will revise the
ceiling price of a medicine under NLEM, if there is a significant change in the
market structure of the particular medicine even in between 5 years.

(xii) Non-price Control Drugs: Under the existing price control regime, the
prices of Non-Scheduled drugs are monitored, and in case the prices of such
drugs increase by more than 40% in a year, subject to certain criteria,
government fixes the prices of such medicines from time to time. In the
proposed policy, all essential drugs are under price control. \t would follow
that non-essential drugs should not be under a controlled regime and their
prices should be fixed by market forces. However, in order to keep a check
on overall drug prices, it is proposed that prices of such drugs be monitored
on regular basis, and where such price increase at a rate of above 10% per
annum is observed, the Government would be empowered to have the price

of these drugs reduced to below this limit, for next 12 months.


(amt I—ars 1] SA HI UAT : HAUNT 8

(xiii) Imported Drugs: The Ceiling Prices determined for drugs falling
under the span of control as in 4(iv) above shall also be applicable to such
drugs that are imported. There will be no separate determination of Ceiling

Prices for imported drugs falling under the span of contro}.

(xiv) Overlap drugs between DPCO 1995 and NLEM-2011: The
prices of medicines which are a part of DPCO 4995 but not in NLEM-2011
would be frozen for one year and thereafter a maximum increase
of 10% per annum, aS in case of other non-NLEM medicines will be

allowed.

(xv) Patented Drugs: There is a separate Committee constituted by
the Government order dated 1° February, 2007 for finalizing the pricing of
Patented Drugs, and decisions on pricing of patented drugs would be taken

based on the recommendations of the Committee.

(xvi) Exemptions: To promote innovation and R&D following drugs will

be kept out of any type of price control:

(a) A manufacturer producing a new drug patented under the Indian
Patent Act, 1970 (product patent) and not produced elsewhere, if
developed through indigenous R&D, would be eligible for exemption
from price control in respect of that drug for a period of 5 years from
the date of commencement of its commercial production in the country.
(o) A manufacturer producing a drug in the country by a new process
developed through indigenous R&D and patented under the Indian
patent Act, 4970, (process patent) would be eligible for exemption from

Uus20aNia-7


R

THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Paxr I—Sec 1)

————_—_

price control in respect of that drug for a period of 5 years from the
date of the commencement of its commercial production in the country.
(c) A formulation involving a new delivery system developed through
indigenous R&D would be eligible for exemption from price control for
a period of 5 years from the date of its market approval in India. The
certification of innovation and R&D may be provided by the office of

Drug Controller General of India (DCGI).

(xvii) The revision of NLEM for the purpose of price control is a dynamic
process and any drug can be added in NLEM in public interest under Drug
Price Control Order on the recommendation of Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare.

(xviii) The production levels, availability and accessibility to the NLEM
drugs and formulations should not fall after price control is introduced and
the Department of Pharmaceuticals will ensure that production levels are
maintained by an appropriate mechanism. Ifa manufacturer of a NLEM drug
with dosages and strengths as specific in NLEM, launches a new drug by
combining the NLEM drug with another NLEM drug or a non-NLEM drug or
by changing the strength and dosages of the same NLEM drug, such
manufacturers shall be required to seek price approval from the Government
before launching the new drug.

(xix) Ministry of Health and Family Welfare will consider making
prescription of drugs by generics names mandatory.

(xx). The distribution of quality affordable generics drugs through Jan

Aushadhi Stores will be strengthened.


(am I—ars 1) VA Hl UAT + AAT

5.

ESSENTIAL ISSUES FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE POLICY:

Control over drug prices can be only one element of an overall strategy for
provision of affordable healthcare. The existence of a vibrant, competitive,
innovative drug industry would be an equally important part of such a strategy.
In addition to this, such a strategy would have to incorporate programs of
affordable healthcare to a majority of the population, either through direct
Government healthcare programs or insurance linked programs, and an
overarching Pharma Contro! Policy, as part of the system of provision of
affordable healthcare to the public at large, would also have to address several

related issues. Some of these are:

(i) Provision of direct healthcare to citizens by expanding healthcare
cover through the State healthcare system, in combination with an
insurance cover based healthcare system.

(ii) Improvement of access to drugs for specialized treatment (anti-
cancer, anti-HIV etc) through special assistance scheme for subsidizing
the prices of such drugs, especially for BPL and APL families.

(iii) Streamlining of the system of procurement of drugs by the
Government for ensuring procurement of quality drugs at reasonable
prices. This would apply in all Government procurement, both by the
Central Government, States, PSUs. In fact, a strong and transparent drug
purchase policy for bulk procurement of drugs by the government would
also help in determining reasonable Ceiling Prices for NLEM drugs under

the Pharmaceutical Pricing Policy, in future.

US 30567 12-8


28 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part I—Sec. 1]

(iv) Promotion of non-branded generic drugs and low cost drugs by
creating a well spread out /ow-cost Pharmacy chain through the Jan
Aushadhi Program, so that the last mile reach of essential drugs are
accessible and affordable to every village/town in the country.

(v) As per the recommendations of the High Level Expert Group
Report on Universal Health Coverage for India submitted to the Planning
Commission in October, 201 1, strengthening of Pharmaceutical Central
Public Sector Enterprises is essential to play a major role in
benchmarking the prices and play a role in Stabilizing the market forces
and enable access to medicines. Further, the CPSUs may be mandated
for producing such essential medicines as determined by the Government :
as per the requirement from time to time. The CPSUs need to be further
Strengthened by bringing them under the Drug Procurement System
through preferential allocation of such requirement under the Public
Healthcare System.

(vi) Education of the public in general as well as Medical fraternity,
and making it obligatory for Doctors to also Prescribe non-branded
generics along with branded generics.

(vii) Implementation of special schemes for providing accessibility of
drugs to low income families, especially BPL families.

(vii) Setting up of drug banks.

(ix) Taking up measures for Strengthening of the pharmaceutical
industry in the following areas:

(a) Strengthening and rationalizing the drug regulatory system.


{WwW Iwas 1] UR Sl UTA : ARTUR]
aVWV3<ca_cqeoqoaé_e—é+u_ao—0u—wo—wwmwwsw0w0VWwWwOwOOOH

(b) Bringing on a common platform all the regulatory
authorities related to drug standards, bio-pharmaceuticals, clinical
trials and Pharmacopeia.

(c) Promotion of research and development in the
pharmaceutical sector, directly through research institutions and
universities, as well as through provision of seed capital, venture
capital funding and subsidies to innovative drug companies.

(d) Enablement of domestic pharmaceutical companies to
achieve international GMP/GLP and GCP standards.

(e) Development of Human Resource, particularly in critical
areas to meet the requirements of pharmaceutical industries.

(f) Rationalization of excise duties on pharmaceuticals.

(g) Setting up of common infrastructure through pharma
development parks, pharma cluster schemes in order to
Strengthen and facilitate the smaller units in the pharmaceutical
industries.

(h) Rationalization of pharma retail trade and strengthening of

pharma supply chains.

5.1 All these issues require detailed consultation and cooperation of all other
Departments of the Government, and the Department of Pharmaceuticals will take
steps to initiate a wholistic policy on Pharmaceutical Sector in due course. To the
Present context, the National Pharmaceuticals Policy will be limited to the aspect of

" the Pricing within the domain of National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Policy- 2012.

6. IMPLEMENTATION:
A new Drugs (Price Control) Order would be notified as soon as possible
after the Notification of the New Policy. The National Pharmaceuticals Pricing

Authority will be the implementation authority for the new Policy and the new Drugs


30 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA : EXTRAORDINARY [Part I—Sec, 1]

(Prices Control) Order. The NPPA would be provided required organizational and
financial support so as to enable it to implement the new Policy in an effective, speedy
and transparent manner. In due course, however, the DPCO, which is presently
mandated under the Essential Commodities Act, would be replaced by specific
legislation covering the issue of price control and monitoring of drugs, which would be

fine tuned to the requirements of the drugs regulatory regime.

DILSHER SINGH KALHAN, Secy.

Printed by the Manager, Government of India Press, Ring Road, Mayapun, New Delhi-] 10064

and Published by the Controller of Publications, Delhi-1 10054,
