NATIONAL POLICY FOR THE CONSERVATION OF THE ANCIENT MONUMENTS, ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND REMAINS
N P C
ATIONAL OLICY FOR ONSERVATION
OF THE ANCIENT MONUMENTS, ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND
REMAINS (NPC – AMASR)
PROTECTED BY THE
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA
(February, 2014)
© 2014
Archaeological Survey of India
Ministry of Culture
Government of India
Janpath, New Delhi 110011
Page 1 of 24

NATIONAL POLICY FOR THE CONSERVATION OF THE ANCIENT MONUMENTS, ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND REMAINS
“The functions of the Archaeological Department are, in the main, two – conservation
and investigation. In the view of the Government both these functions have an equal
claim to its patronage, and it will be seen from that follows that in recent years
increasing attention has been paid to exploration and research of every kind. But for
the present, owing to its persistent neglect in years gone by, conservation is, and for
long remain, the paramount duty of the department. In the discharge of this duty the
first essential is to take stock of the existing materials and to decide which of them
are worthy of preservation”.
--Indian Archaeological Policy, 1915
Being a Resolution issued by the Governor General
In Council on 22 October, 1915, Calcutta
VISION STATEMENT
National Policy for the Conservation of the Ancient Monuments, Archaeological Sites
and Remains (NPC-AMASR) continues, on the one hand, to further the already laid-
out objectives of safeguarding monuments and sites of national importance and, on
the other, envisions bringing in renewed impetus for contemporising and indigenising
the conservation approach. The process of conservation [of monuments] is being
aimed to manifest itself as a dynamic enterprise intertwining concerns for the
sustenance of their physical fabric with their overall effective management. As we
have moved into the second decade of the twenty-first century, the duty of the
Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) will be, as it has been, to conserve these
monuments [along with their setting] with utmost care, to be cherished upon by the
nation as “national treasures”.
Page 2 of 24

NATIONAL POLICY FOR THE CONSERVATION OF THE ANCIENT MONUMENTS, ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND REMAINS
PREAMBLE
I ndia has an extraordinarily rich, vast and diverse cultural heritage that has left a huge
corpus of built heritage across the country. A glimpse of this richness and variety can be
seen in the form of monuments and archaeological sites, 3,678 monuments and sites
including 20 world heritage properties, to date, that are protected by the Archaeological
Survey of India (hereafter ASI). Their sheer magnitude in number alone is overwhelming
besides the fact that these are iconic symbols of India’s diverse cultural expressions and
historic continuity.
One of the prime mandates of ASI is to ensure the conservation and maintenance of all
protected monuments throughout the country. Needless to say that the ASI has undertaken,
in the past 152 years of its existence, large scale conservation initiatives across the country
which ensure the continuing existence of all monuments that were earlier known to be or
discovered in a fragile or vulnerable state. It may not be entirely inappropriate to state that
without ASI’s timely interventions and continuous safeguarding many of the monuments and
sites would have perhaps disappeared and, therefore, lost to humanity forever. ASI’s
contribution to the conservation and safeguarding of monuments is noteworthy not only
within the country but outside as well. Significant conservation works have been carried out
by ASI outside India, such as the conservation of the Bamiyan Buddhas (Afghanistan),
Angkor Wat and Ta Prohm complexes (Cambodia), which have received international
acclaim. Stupendous conservation works carried out by the ASI in the last hundred years
have been well documented and are archived in the form of a repository of images,
drawings, inspection notes, and recorded in large number of publications.
The conservation of monuments in India, as undertaken by ASI, draws its formal inspiration
from the Indian Archaeological Policy, 1915 that mandates the safeguarding and protection
of monuments as an important activity of the organisation. Conservation guidelines and
principles were further elaborated in the Conservation Manual: Handbook for the Use of
Archaeological Officers and others Entrusted with the Care of Ancient Monuments, 1923,
and it is these guidelines that have largely been adhered to by the ASI ever since. Apart
from these internal guidelines, ASI has taken cognizance of the various international
charters and guidelines in defining conservation approaches for protected monuments.
It is a well known fact that the functions of ASI have changed manifold since its inception
and, therefore, duties and responsibilities of ASI’s archaeological officers, in-charge of
conservation and management of a protected monument, have gone beyond their earlier
mandate. Functions of an archaeological officer are no longer limited to the safeguarding of
a monument but now also include maintaining and sustaining its setting and environment as
well as to continuously engage with communities that either reside within the proximity of a
monument or those that are inextricably associated with the monument itself.
Monuments and archaeological sites, which are a finite and non-renewable cultural resource
of our country, unlike ever before, are now subject to an ever-increasing pressure from
development and the increase in number of tourists visiting them, which has put an
unprecedented adverse impact on them.
The proposed Policy aims to not only draw lessons and inspirations from the ASI’s rich
legacy for conservation but also acknowledges the adoption of contemporary approaches to
conservation, management and protection of monuments and archaeological sites, and
proposes various principles of interventions within and around them. The Policy also
acclaims available traditional craftsmanship in the country and the use of traditional building
materials, practices and skills as an integral part of the conservation process. The Policy, for
the first time, deals with topical aspects like the management of tourism and development
Page 3 of 24

NATIONAL POLICY FOR THE CONSERVATION OF THE ANCIENT MONUMENTS, ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND REMAINS
(within and around a monument), as well as issues of capacity building and building of
partnerships with multi-disciplinary organisations and institutions. The Policy attempts to put
a monument in perspective (as a ubiquitous part of its setting) and underpins the role of local
communities.
The proposed Policy primarily focuses on all Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites
and Remains, declared as monuments of national importance under the AMASR
(Amendment and Validation) Act, 2010 and does not, for the time being, include unprotected
built heritage. The Policy may be read in conjunction with the provisions of the AMASR
(Amendment and Validation) Act, 2010. The Policy is envisaged as a dynamic document
and, as it is put into operation by the ASI’s Archaeological officers and field staff, it is subject
to periodical reviews as may be decided by ASI. It is also hoped that the proposed Policy will
also be applicable to a vast number of state protected monuments spread all over the
country.
INTRODUCTION
Reflecting and learning from Archaeological Survey of India (ASI)’s vast experience in
conservation of monuments across the country and even abroad;
Appreciating the richness and diversity of our country’s monuments protected by ASI and
various States;
Drawing upon various international charters and guidelines for conservation with a view to
adapting them to the Indian context as well as ASI’s Conservation Manual (1923) with the
need to update it in order to deal with contemporary issues of conservation and
management;
Acknowledging and Identifying that monuments are not only non-living but are as well the
living heritage thus necessitating and including the role of local communities in their
conservation and management;
Understanding that the country still has long established building crafts and traditions and
raj mistris, sthapatis, stone carvers, carpenters, craftspersons, etc., to name a few, who can
play an important role in the conservation of monuments;
Accepting that conservation is a multi-disciplinary enterprise necessary in developing the
holistic understanding of an intervention;
Considering the necessity of a contemporising and indigenising approach for conserving
monuments for posterity;
The Text of the National Policy for the Conservation of Ancient Monuments, Archaeological
Sites and Remains (hereafter NPC–AMASR) is proposed as follows:
Page 4 of 24

NATIONAL POLICY FOR THE CONSERVATION OF THE ANCIENT MONUMENTS, ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND REMAINS
1 Monument and its Context
1.01 “Ancient Monument” means any structure, erection or monument, or any tumulus or
place of interment, or any cave, rock-sculpture, inscription or monolith which is of
historical, archaeological or artistic interest and which has been in existence for not
less than one hundred years and includes:
i. the remains of an ancient monument,
ii. the site of an ancient monument,
iii. such portion of land adjoining the site of an ancient monument as may be
required for fencing or covering in or otherwise preserving such monument, and
iv. the means of access to, and convenient inspection of an ancient monument.
“Archaeological Site and Remains” means any area which contains or is
reasonably believed to contain ruins or relics of historical or archaeological
importance which have been in existence for not less than one hundred years, and
includes:
i. such portion of land adjoining the area as may be required for fencing or
covering in or otherwise preserving it, and
ii. the means of access to, and convenient inspection of the area.
1.02 For the sake of NPC–AMASR, limiting itself to the monuments and archaeological
sites protected by the Archaeological Survey of India, the term “Monument”
mentioned in the Policy shall connote “The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological
Sites and Remains” as defined in Section 2 (a) and 2 (d) of the Ancient Monuments,
Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment and Validation) Act, 2010 unless
specified otherwise.
1.03 “Monuments” comprise a vast array of human-built edifices, either standing or
underground or still buried, and these reflect tangible manifestation of India’s rich
past. Monuments include archaeological sites and mounds, caves and rock shelters,
rock-cut temples, monoliths, sculptures and bas-relief panels, underground structures
and architectural heritage representing various categories, e.g., religious, secular,
defensive, funerary, landscapes, etc. The monuments may be ‘functional’ or ‘non-
functional’ depending upon whether or not these are functioning as per their original
intended use. 1
1.04 “Monuments” were often built as part of a wider urban, rural or natural context /
setting and not constructed in isolation. Thus, monuments should be conceived as
inseparable part of their immediate context or setting.
1.05 Monuments reflect myriad applications of building materials, such as, mud, wood,
stone, brick, lime, metal, glass, etc., or composite material application, used under
different construction techniques, often representing different architectural styles and
styles of ornamentation (structural and applied), reflecting influences from other
regions and diverse cultures due to cultural interactions in the past. There are
considerable regional and local variations in monuments in terms of materials, styles
and techniques also due to influence of vernacular (indigenous) architecture.
1.06 All Monuments, once declared monuments of national importance, irrespective of
their living or non-living status, transcend their original function2 and should be
valued and conserved in a spirit of being exemplars of past cultures and represent
exemplary human creativity, building crafts tradition, patronization, and architectural
and/or artistic and/or engineering accomplishments. These monuments also serve as
Page 5 of 24

NATIONAL POLICY FOR THE CONSERVATION OF THE ANCIENT MONUMENTS, ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND REMAINS
tangible manifestation of historical and cultural events and developments of our past
that spreads over several millennia.
1.07 All monuments that are declared monuments of national importance3 are deemed
to have high value / significance – archaeological (including architectural, artistic,
scientific, engineering and technological), historical (including events and
association), cultural (including religious and intangible) and ecological. Monuments
can have either a single or a combination of these values, which contribute to their
importance at the national level.
1.08 All monuments are irreplaceable and non-renewable cultural resource of the country,
a by-product of a multi-ethnic and diverse culture. Irrespective of their scale, location
and type, monuments, once declared so, should be regarded as National Treasures
or National Icons. Utmost care must be taken to protect and preserve them for
posterity.
1.09 The understanding and interpretation of a “Monument” has changed with time, over
the past 100 years, worldwide. Many more categories of historic buildings and sites
are considered heritage and are being conserved by countries across the world. The
process of identifying monuments of national importance also representing under-
represented and / or including types, such as, but not limiting to, for instance, historic
gardens, historic cities (settlements and precincts), industrial heritage, vernacular
heritage, cultural landscapes, cultural routes, etc., should regularly continue.4
2 Terms and Definitions
2.01 Conservation5 means the processes through which material, design and integrity of
the monument is safeguarded in terms of its archaeological and architectural value,
its historic significance and its cultural or intangible associations.
2.02 Structure means any building, equipment, device or other facility which is fixed to
the land and is a part of the monument, site and/or archaeological remains.
2.03 Intervention6 means the action undertaken with the objective of conservation, as
outlined in the sub-articles 2.04 to 2.17, for safeguarding of a monument and its
integrity.
2.04 Fabric means all movable and immovable contents of or within a monument
including its setting.
2.05 Maintenance or preventive conservation means the such care of a monument as
is exercised in order to prevent damage and deterioration and to avoid an
intervention as long as possible. All monuments should be duly maintained in order
to retain their significance and regularly monitored to thwart any major unnecessary
intervention.
2.06 Preservation7 means maintaining the status quo of a monument including its setting
thereby not allowing any changes, either through deliberate human interventions or
due to action of natural agents of decay to its fabric or its immediate environment.
2.07 Repair8 means removing or replacing decayed or damaged material or portion of a
monument in order to impart stability and to prevent loss of original material.
Page 6 of 24

NATIONAL POLICY FOR THE CONSERVATION OF THE ANCIENT MONUMENTS, ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND REMAINS
2.08 Restoration9 means bringing back the monument or any part thereof, as nearly as
possible, to an earlier known state or condition.
2.09 Reassembly or Reinstatement (Anastylosis)10 means putting existing but
dismembered parts back together.
2.10 Adaptation or Adaptive Reuse11means modifying a lesser significance part of the
monument, or a place inside or outside it, to suit it to a compatible use involving as
little as possible loss of value (as outlined in Sub-article 1.05).
2.11 Reconstruction12 means to rebuild in the original form.
2.12 Retrofitting13 means to consolidate a monument’s structure by inserting new parts or
material using new technology in order to improve their safety and to make them
functional.
2.13 Scientific clearance14 means systematic removal of historic building material,
debris, buried within or outside the monument, not necessarily at that location to
retrieve any buried architectural members or sculptures, etc., with the purpose of
study, investigation and possible reinstatement or, in case it is not feasible, to
remove and preserve them in a safer environment.
2.14 Stabilization or Consolidation15 means action to arrest of processes of decay using
external agents that are “time tested and proven scientifically”.
2.15 Transplantation or Translocation16 means removing the monument from its
existing location and relocating it at an alternate location.
2.16 Cleaning means periodic removal of any harmful encrustations or non-original
surface deposits and bio-deteriorating agents from the surface of a monument.
2.17 Authenticity17 is a value / significance imparted to a monument through a truthful
and accurate depiction of one or more of the following elements:
• location and setting;
• form and design;
• materials, construction techniques and building craftsmanship; and
• function and traditional management systems.
2.18 Integrity is the quality/ extent of the completeness / intactness of the monument
demonstrated through its attributes such as structural, functional (in case of a living
monument) and visual.
3 Conservation Principles
3.01 The conservation of monuments, archaeological sites and remains constitutes all
necessary actions or interventions within and around a monument which are
undertaken, as and when deemed necessary, in order to: (a) prolong its life and
existence; (b) prevent its damage and deterioration; (c) minimise the impact of
external agents of decay (natural and human induced) on its setting, structure and
material; and (d) prepare it for natural or human induced disasters.
Page 7 of 24

NATIONAL POLICY FOR THE CONSERVATION OF THE ANCIENT MONUMENTS, ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND REMAINS
3.02 A monument or an archaeological site should be subjected to minimum - whilst
only necessary - interventions so as to maintain its authenticity and integrity.
Original / historical material and an architectural / ornamental detail (structural or
non-structural) must be valued and retained for as long as possible and should not
be replaced without conducting a proper investigation or simply because these have
lost their original form and appearance as a result of slight erosion or natural
processes of deterioration.
3.03 All efforts to conserve a monument should be made to retain its value and
significance, its authenticity and integrity, its visual connections to and from the
monument, and to maintain a faithful representation of its original / historic
appearance. The purpose of such an effort should be to ensure that the monument is
kept in its original state or, in certain cases, restored to an earlier known state or to a
state as it was discovered at the time of its identification and notification.
3.04 The conservation of a monument is a continuous process. Adequate resources
(human and financial) should be made available to conserve it for posterity.
3.05 Conservation of a monument should, under no circumstance, be based on any
conjecture or artistic imagination and should be based on reliable documentary
evidences (past conservation records, documents, paintings sketches, drawings,
photographs, travelogues, etc.) and/or insitu archaeological evidences.
3.06 Conservation should be treated as a multi-disciplinary enterprise that focuses on
developing holistic solutions against various agencies of decay and deterioration that
are acting on the monument. Comprehensive and careful study of all relevant
aspects should be undertaken to develop an over-arching conservation philosophy
and approach for each monument.
3.07 Conservation of the original / historical material should be aimed as an essential pre-
requisite to sustain the time-dimension of a monument which confirms its antiquity
and faithfully maintains its authenticity.
3.08 Interventions such as restoration, consolidation, reproduction and retrofitting carried
out within a monument should, as far as possible, be clearly discernible as a later
alteration / repair / restoration, etc., to be able to clearly identify them from the
original fabric of the structure. Nonetheless, in certain cases, where a monument is
being restored with the intention of merging [a new intervention] with the original
fabric, for the sake of maintaining architectural integrity, work must be done very
carefully by matching the original material / details in terms of form, colour and
specification preferably through the use of same material and employing traditional
skills as used in the original fabric. Such interventions should, as far as possible, be
reversible in nature. The decision for achieving such objectives should be carefully
recorded and documented for posterity.
4 Conservation Approach
4.01 Conservation of a monument should employ appropriate scientific technology and
equipment to facilitate research and the understanding of its physical nature, the
analysis of its materials and construction technology, and that of its current condition.
The use of appropriate technology should also be mandated for documentation
purposes.
Page 8 of 24

NATIONAL POLICY FOR THE CONSERVATION OF THE ANCIENT MONUMENTS, ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND REMAINS
4.02 Conservation should not only limit itself to the intervention within the structure / fabric
of a monument but shall also include the protection and maintenance of the setting or
environment that is integral to it.
4.03 Conservation should include regular monitoring and continuous care of a monument
and its setting. Short-term (up to 2 years), Mid-term (2 – 5 years) and Long-term (5
years and above) monitoring and maintenance plans should be developed and
implemented to prevent any further deterioration of the structure that may warrant
unnecessary comprehensive conservation work later.18
4.04 Documentation should be an essential pre-requisite before conserving a monument.
Documentation aids in understanding the nature of the fabric of a monument and its
value as well as its current condition that should be used as basis by which its
Conservation Plan should be prepared.
4.05 Regular inspection must be undertaken by the archaeological officers to ensure
routine visits to monuments, at least once a year, to examine the condition of a
monument and to draw up inspection notes which will aid in the preparation of
necessary conservation programme or plan.
4.06 Annual Conservation Plan (ACP) should be carefully drawn up by all Circles clearly
prioritising conservation works for monuments based on available resources in a
given financial year. Priority should be given to works of urgent nature required to
preserve or consolidate a monument. Annual Conservation Plan can be revised, from
time to time, in cases of emergency or in case of any unforeseen circumstance
emerging during the execution of conservation works. Annual plans should also be
drawn up for providing amenities or necessary infrastructure within monuments.
4.07 It is important to prepare a Conservation Plan19 for a monument preceding actual
conservation work in order to understand the proposed intervention[s] in the context
of a monument’s typology, and function. The Conservation Plan should clearly define
the value-based approach to conservation and outline the extent of proposed
conservation interventions. Conservation Plans should be reviewed regularly to
evaluate previous measures and their effectiveness. Plans should be revised to
incorporate modifications from time to time or if any new concern is observed that
impacts the authenticity and integrity of the monument. The plan should be reviewed
once every five years. Site Management Plans (SMPs)20 may also be prepared for
monuments to address all relevant extrinsic and intrinsic issues. SMPs should be
prepared by multidisciplinary team of professionals, in consultation with ASI’s
archaeological officers, to assist ASI in adopting a coordinated approach (by
addressing the concerns of all relevant stakeholders) to conserve and manage a
monument along with its setting.
4.08 Conservation works should be peer reviewed from time to time by a group of
multidisciplinary experts who should examine the quality of on-going conservation
works and whether conservation is being carried out according to the approved
conservation plan.
4.09 The entire process of conservation should be documented before, during and after
conservation in maps, drawings, photographs, digital records and field notes so as to
create continuous records of interventions. The documentation should capture
various stages of intervention and all relevant details.21 This will be useful from the
point of view of understanding all past and current interventions in the future.
Page 9 of 24

NATIONAL POLICY FOR THE CONSERVATION OF THE ANCIENT MONUMENTS, ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND REMAINS
4.10 Critical attention should be paid in case where a monument is in use and continues
to perform its originally intended function. In such cases, it is important to review
existing conservation approaches / philosophies keeping in mind conservation
concerns as well as functions that are being performed within the monument.22 Thus,
conservation and functional / administrative issues pertaining to such a monument
should be seen as a harmonious and complementary activity and should be balanced
in a way that its authenticity and integrity is not compromised.
4.11 Original / historical material or details23 may or may not be replaced. Action in this
regard will depend upon whether or not the archaeological or architectural integrity of
the monument is to be retained. Replacement of parts of the material fabric or a
detail may be considered only if it has completely lost its inherent material strength or
structural integrity. Replacement may only be undertaken to prevent further
deterioration, formation of faults or decay of other portions of the structure. This
aspect may be borne in mind while replacing a structural or an architectural member.
Missing or damaged sculptures, idols, wall paintings, inscriptions, etc., should not be
replaced or attempted to be completed.
4.12 If the original material or detail is at all to be replaced it must be the last option and
shall be undertaken only upon ensuring that no other conservation action can ensure
its insitu survival. Original material / detail, once it is decided for replacement, as far
as possible, should be stored in a safe environment for the purpose of conducting
further investigations / research, or it may even be put on display for the purpose of
education or study.
4.13 Time-dimension (i.e., antiquity or age) should be maintained by preserving the patina
(benign surface encrustation) of the material or its surfaces (exterior and interior)24.
Hence, measures should be taken to clean the material in a way that even all bio-
deterioration agents and harmful / non-original surface encrustations are removed,
the patina, which is the protective layer, is maintained. Any intervention to clean
surfaces should be undertaken after thorough research and documentation.
4.14 The use of inappropriate chemicals for cleaning monument surfaces and synthetically
produced building materials for conservation should be avoided keeping in view their
incompatibility with the original fabric of a monument. The likely action of any
synthetically produced material to be used in repair, restoration or renovation upon
the surface or stability of the structure must be properly investigated before its actual
use in conservation work.
4.15 Highest attention should be paid to the conservation of fragile ornamentation
embellishing a monument. All efforts backed by scientific knowledge should be made
to protect and preserve them insitu for as long as possible. In case all efforts to
preserve the fragile ornamentation insitu fail to protect its material and visual
integrity, an assessment should be made to remove and place them in a safe
environment whilst replacing them with reproductions of the same profile and
specifications to maintain architectural integrity.25 This, however, is to be done only in
extremely rare cases.
4.16 It is important to respect various additions / alterations in time or “layers of history”
that have contributed to the development or evolution of a monument.26 In cases
where inappropriate modern or recent additions and/or alterations have been made
to the monument in the recent past, after its protection, which have a direct impact on
the authenticity / integrity of the monument, it may be desirable to remove or undo
such interventions. The monument should then be restored to either its original or an
earlier known state depending upon the available evidences. In no case, however,
Page 10 of 24

NATIONAL POLICY FOR THE CONSERVATION OF THE ANCIENT MONUMENTS, ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND REMAINS
should any part, original or pre-modern, be removed on grounds of improving the
appearance of the monument, or changing its complexion, or to achieve a better
perceived conformity with its function.
4.17 In any attempt for consolidation that is carried out by inserting new material or by use
of chemicals, the nature and specifications of the original / historical material should
be kept in view. The new material to be used for the conservation should match in
specification the original / historic material or should be complementary and
compatible. Prior to any intervention, it is desirable that the original / historical
material should be analysed for its composition and specifications and for the new
material to be accordingly selected.
4.18 Landscaping and horticultural practices, including surface development are
necessary within and around a monument to provide a cleaner, dust free micro-
environment, to create comfortable spaces, and to enhance visual perception.
Introducing a new landscape within and / or around a monument should put greater
emphasis on the use of local flora, and should, as far as possible, be least
maintenance oriented and be self-sustainable.
4.19 Formal landscapes (for instance, historic gardens) that were intrinsically designed
and laid out as a part of a monument should be preserved, as far as possible, as per
the original design and intent, yet respecting various historic layers of interventions.
Any contemporary inappropriate alterations should be carefully removed so as not to
damage the historic landscape and its layout. In certain cases it may also be
necessary to undertake archaeo-botanical investigations in earlier records (paintings,
photographs, descriptions, etc.) or scientific clearing to discover original landscape
features that may have been buried over time. It is desirable to use appropriate
technology to establish conformity with the original plantation and species of flora
that were planted and laid out in a historic garden before proceeding with the
restoration of its original / earlier layout.
4.20 Conservation of a monument should not limit itself to structural interventions but
should also consider, wherever necessary, restoration of historic interiors which
alleviates the visitor’s experience and understanding of the function of a monument.
Historic/original furniture and furnishings, including illumination, can be authentically
restored in certain types of monuments, for instance, in mediaeval forts and palaces,
to bring out its functional context. However, this should be done only on the basis of
documentary or material evidence and no conjecture or artistic impressions should
be allowed in restoring historic interiors. Under no circumstance historic interiors of
the ancient monuments should be used as recreation spaces.
4.21 Special care should be taken at archaeological sites or mounds wherein architectural
remains or artefacts found on its surface or sub-surface should also be carefully
preserved at site or in case not feasible should be carefully removed (after proper
documentation) from the site to be kept in safe custody. It should be accordingly
decided whether the extracted architectural or structural remains could be used
during the process of preservation of the archaeological site (anastylosis).
5 Conservation of Monuments (Value-based Approach)
5.01 It is important to define the nature of conservation intervention for monuments that is
based on their value / significance which is determined by the nature and extent of
intervention required for its conservation. The imperative of such value based
Page 11 of 24

NATIONAL POLICY FOR THE CONSERVATION OF THE ANCIENT MONUMENTS, ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND REMAINS
approach is derived from the nature / typology of a monument and from the
interpretation of its value / significance.
5.02 Preservation should be the major objective in the case of monuments with high
archaeological value. These are the archaeological sites or remains of a monument
or portions of monuments with decorative features, including those with applied
ornamentation, such as wall paintings, inscriptions and calligraphy, sculptures, etc.;
5.03 Restoration27 may be undertaken on monuments with high architectural value and
only in parts of a monument wherein there are missing geometric or floral patterns, or
structural members of a monument which have been damaged recently. At no cost,
shall an attempt to restore an entire building be allowed as it will falsify history and
will compromise its authenticity. Similarly, decorative features such as wall paintings,
inscriptions, calligraphy and sculptures should also not be restored.
5.04 Reconstruction28 may be undertaken for such monuments wherein such an
intervention is the only way by which to retain or retrieve their integrity / context and
without which its survival is impossible. Reconstruction should be attempted only in
extreme cases, such as damage or destruction due to the impact of a disaster
(natural or human induced) or structural failure, and should be undertaken only on
the basis of evidence and not conjecture.
5.05 Reproduction29 of members of a monument may be undertaken for such a
monument whose original members (structural and / or ornamental) have
deteriorated and lost their structural and material integrity and removing these from
their original location is the only way to safeguarding those members as well as the
monument itself.
5.06 Sympathetic and Adaptive Reuse30 can be undertaken only for ancillary portions of a
monument, should this be the way to maintain and / or sustain the monument or to
incorporate complementary functions, for instance, ASI’s field offices, interpretation
centres, inspection rooms, storage spaces, public amenities, etc. Such reuse should
be strictly limited to the services necessary for the monument’s preservation, and
should not be extended to the construction of residential buildings or offices that are
dedicated for other purposes. All such construction should also be subject to
provisions of Articles 14.02 and 14.03.
5.07 Transplantation or Translocation of a monument is to be done only in the rarest of
rare circumstances, and that it should only be undertaken as a means for
safeguarding the integrity of the monument. Such removal deprives a monument of
its original spatial context and should be considered only if the monument cannot be
maintained or preserved in its original surrounding. Transplantation should precede
comprehensive documentation, a thorough recording of all events and circumstances
that necessitate such intervention. Translocation of the monument should be
undertaken after careful analysis of the new site (to which the relocation is
proposed), and aspects such as soil investigation and visual integrity.
6 Role of Building Craftsmanship in Conservation
6.01 India is privileged to benefit from the continuing existence of traditional masons,
crafts persons, carvers, etc., who pursue their traditional practices in different parts of
the country. They practice pre-modern traditions of construction, detailing, sculpting,
carving, painting and traditional knowledge systems developed and inherited by them
Page 12 of 24

NATIONAL POLICY FOR THE CONSERVATION OF THE ANCIENT MONUMENTS, ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND REMAINS
which are in consonance with the understanding of ritualistic aspects and principles
and with elements of design employed in the construction or carving of architectural
or ornamental members embellishing a monument. In most cases these traditional
knowledge have been transferred hereditarily for generations or following guru-
shishya-parampara (teacher-disciple tradition) and is largely unrecorded.
6.02 Craftspersons that comprise traditional builders and masons such as sthapatis, stone
carvers, carpenters, woodcarvers, ironsmiths, painters, etc., to name a few, can play
a great role in the conservation process as they are living repositories of building and
artistic traditions which have been sustained through generations. Their role in
conserving a monument is paramount.
6.03 Traditional skills should be utilised as far as possible in the maintenance, repair and
conservation of monuments for which they are relevant. Efforts should be made to
utilise genuinely traditional skills and not accept false or fraudulent claims.
6.04 Traditional knowledge and rites and rituals connected with the building materials and
construction should not only be respected but should also be widely applied after
following proper trials or tests as to establish their acceptability in the conservation of
a monument, for which it is appropriate.
6.05 In the context of a monument, the employment of craftspersons and the utilisation of
their skills should be limited to the restoration and reproduction of geometric designs,
patterns and carvings as well as in the implementation of restoration and
reproduction of designs in historic interiors that is based on documentary or insitu
evidences and not for exercising their creativity. Thus, the replication of sculptures
and inscriptions (including calligraphy) on ancient or mediaeval monuments should
not be allowed since such an act will decisively compromise with their antiquity and
integrity.31 Traditional craftsmanship could also be widely used for the reconstruction
or the adaptive reuse of a monument.
6.06 Conservation should, therefore, be a medium to support and encourage these
traditional masons and craftspersons as well as nurture their traditional systems of
knowledge and schools. Not only should traditional knowledge systems be
documented, but transmission of these to the younger generation should also be
encouraged so as to perpetuate their participation and learning in these building
crafts techniques. Such persons can then be employed, as and when required, in the
conservation of monuments.32
6.07 Conservation should be seen not merely as a product-centric enterprise (i.e.,
conservation of a monument) but as a process-centric endeavour wherein promoting
and sustaining building crafts, and communities associated with these, become an
integral procedure in safeguarding a monument.
7 Capacity Building
7.01 Conservation of a monument, being multi-disciplinary and scientific enterprise,
demands regular training and creation of professional expertise such as that of
archaeologists, conservation architects, engineers, scientists, horticulturists,
planners, surveyors, etc., to name a few. Capacity building has to be undertaken not
only for professionals within organisations, such as the ASI, but also with allied
professionals, technicians, academicians, craftspersons, etc., so as to update and
Page 13 of 24

NATIONAL POLICY FOR THE CONSERVATION OF THE ANCIENT MONUMENTS, ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND REMAINS
upgrade present conservation methods and to enable the adoption and adaptation of
best conservation practices available anywhere nationally or internationally.
7.02 There is a strong need to develop, maintain and regularly update a pool of trained
and skilled conservators, artisans and craftpersons who must be engaged in and
exposed to a variety of conservation activities, nationally and internationally, and
from time to time depending on the expertise and skills required for specific
conservation projects.33
7.03 Considering the fact that monuments are an irreplaceable and non-renewable
heritage resource, responsibility for documenting and conserving these monuments
should be entrusted to the ASI technical staff or professionals who have undergone
proper training in the field of conservation. Anyone who is involved with the
conservation of monuments should be qualified and sufficiently experienced well
versed with the nature and behaviour of historic materials and their application
including the impact of agents (natural and human-induced) that cause their decay
and deterioration. Capacity building34 of such a person should be undertaken to
enable him / her to develop a holistic understanding of the monument (including its
setting) and the knowledge required for its safeguarding and maintenance.
7.04 More and more universities and educational institutions35 across the country could be
encouraged to impart training to professionals and practitioners and offer
specialisation in conservation and management of monuments. Specialised courses
at doctoral, post-graduate and graduate levels including short-term courses should
be evolved and conducted regularly so as to train young professionals and
practitioners.
7.05 Collaborative programmes should be encouraged amongst institutions, organisations
and laboratories working and researching on the different aspects of documentation
and conservation in order to share information and expertise in these fields.
7.06 Central and State agencies, responsible for the conservation of State-protected
monuments or unprotected historical buildings, should also be encouraged, from time
to time, to send their in-house staff for training so as to enhance their knowledge and
skills in various fields of conservation and management of monuments.
8 Promotional / Outreach Programmes
8.01 It is necessary to generate public awareness, to educate and involve people by
instilling in them a sense of delight, appreciation and pride for monuments, to make
them understand the importance of various legislations in protecting heritage and to
join hands with various agencies working to protect this tangible cultural wealth for
posterity. The aim is to make the local communities and visitors aware about their
responsibilities towards the monuments of the country, so as to obtain their help in
the task of their preservation and maintenance.
8.02 All related agencies responsible for the conservation of monuments should,
therefore, organise, from time to time, awareness campaigns and promotional /
outreach programmes about the monuments of the country. The programmes should
focus on various aspects related to their history and conservation, and to educate
and sensitise local communities in preserving these monuments. At Site Museums
attached to the monuments, visitors should be encouraged to engage themselves in
the discoveries at the site. Special pamphlets and brochures, should be developed
Page 14 of 24

NATIONAL POLICY FOR THE CONSERVATION OF THE ANCIENT MONUMENTS, ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND REMAINS
and distributed freely to the visitor whilst acquainting him / her with the history and
context of the monument.
9 Tourism and Visitor Management
9.01 There has been an unprecedented interest amongst national and foreign visitors to
visit monuments for a variety of reasons, such as for education, information,
pilgrimage, recreation and entertainment. A visitor gains tremendous knowledge and
insight not only about the history of a monument or an archaeological site but also
about the social, cultural and economic aspects and its contemporary society at
large.
9.02 Tourism, as an industry, plays a very important role in promoting visits to monuments
and in providing all necessary infrastructure for its support.36 However, it has been
experienced that, in some instances, due to over-crowding in some of the
monuments, these are subjected to tremendous adverse pressures which catalyses
their decay and deterioration.37
9.03 It is, therefore, important to determine the carrying capacity of a monument,
especially for those where tourists visit in very high numbers.38 In order to better
protect and preserve such monuments, the number of people visiting them as well as
their access should be managed and, if situation demands, these may have to be
limited temporarily, especially in such areas or parts that are highly vulnerable to
decay and / or deterioration. Aspects like fragility, rarity as well as apprehensions of
permanent irreversible damage on the monument or its part should be looked into so
as to determine how many visitors can be allowed to visit it within a day or at a given
period in time.
9.04 Suitable facilities / infrastructure should be created within or near the monument for
the convenience of visitors. Facilities like parking that allows for a sufficient number
of vehicles, toilets, cloak room, potable water, audio-guide facilities, ticket booths,
souvenir counter, etc., should be located in a manner that these are easily accessible
prior to entering a monument.39 Similarly, guidebooks or pamphlets indicating a
monument’s history, its architecture and planning, and various do’s and don’ts,
should be provided to a visitor in order to enhance his / her understanding of the site.
9.05 Significantly contributing to the understanding and appraisal of a monument is the
facility for interpretation. Interpretation Centres should be established at suitable
locations to provide information40 and interpretation about the monument not only
with regard to its history, architecture and events associated with the monument but
also about its setting and thereby aptly placing it in its appropriate regional, socio-
cultural and socio-political context. Appropriate medium, technology and innovative
methods of interpretation should be adopted for demonstration and presentation of
information to a visitor. Depending upon the type of visitor, information can be
provided in multiple languages.
9.06 Interpretation or Information centres should be designed and located in a way that
these do not disturb, in any manner possible, the environment and setting of the
monument. As far as possible, the use of vernacular (local) material and techniques
or the use of materials complementary to the historic building material of the
monument should be adopted for the construction of the interpretation centre.
Page 15 of 24

NATIONAL POLICY FOR THE CONSERVATION OF THE ANCIENT MONUMENTS, ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND REMAINS
9.07 Visitor approach and circulation should be worked out to facilitate movement within
the monument in order to achieve optimum accessibility thereby causing least
hindrance. However, care should be taken in controlling access to areas which are
vulnerable to excessive influx of visitors (as provided for in Article 9.03).
9.08 Adequate signage (sign-boards) should be provided at appropriate locations to give
necessary and unambiguous information41 such as access points, at points of entry,
at appropriate locations at its various sections, and at facilities within and near the
monument. Signages should also be provided at suitable locations within the
monument in order to explain authentically its history and nature and / or its
significance and values. Signages (Sign-boards) should be designed in a way that
they are clearly legible, and materials used should be those that complement the
nature of the monument.
10 Illumination of a Monument
10.01 Monuments often act as landmarks in urban areas or settings of which they are an
ubiquitous part. This aspect can be accentuated through the introduction of
appropriate lighting that allows for interplay of light and shade which will heighten
their presence and appearance within the setting.
10.02 Monuments may be illuminated for the benefit of visitors and local communities who
may either, as decided on a case to case basis, be allowed to visit and experience
them during certain hours in the evening or to appreciate their constant presence. In
most cases, monuments may be illuminated externally at night to invite attention to
their form and silhouette as well as for their security.
10.03 Illumination should be done in a way that the monument is not subjected to bright
lights that may attract insects, especially during monsoons, or fade the colour of its
surfaces, especially when these are painted or carved. In cases where illumination is
placed internally within a monument, care should be taken so that the illumination
levels are appropriate and no distortion in the colours of the wall surfaces occurs or
on its decorative features, such as, on wall paintings, etc.
10.04 Appropriate technology should be selected for illumination so that no intervention is
made on the structure or fabric of a monument. Lighting, wiring, and related utilities
should be designed and located in a manner that these are not visible during the day.
The technology applied / used should, as far as possible, be self-sustainable42 and
easy to maintain. The use of natural sources of energy, wherever possible, should be
encouraged, provided that this technology that is adopted for the harnessing of
natural sources of energy does not, in any way possible, impact on the visual
integrity of the monument.
11 Public-Private Partnership in Heritage Conservation and
Management
11.01 It has been realised in recent years that despite the best efforts put up by various
Central and State agencies in the conservation and management of monuments, it
remains immensely challenging to conserve and manage them on the account of the
limited availability of human and financial resource. The increasing number of visitors
and rising costs of proper preservation and conservation have made it necessary for
public efforts to be supplemented by effort from private sources.
Page 16 of 24

NATIONAL POLICY FOR THE CONSERVATION OF THE ANCIENT MONUMENTS, ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND REMAINS
11.02 Accordingly, Public-Private Partnership (PPP) assumes greater significance in the
conservation and management of our monuments and this can be encouraged with
the active support of the public enterprise.
11.03 Whilst conservation and upkeep of the monument remains with ASI, aspects such as
visitor amenities, signages (sign-boards), and amelioration of the environment
around monument can be undertaken by adopting the PPP model wherein human
and financial resources can be generated from outside the government intended for
such a purpose.43
12 Community Participation in Conservation
12.01 Local communities are important stakeholders of heritage. They can play an
important role in the conservation and management of a monument. Their role is
particularly seen in “living” monuments which are used by the local communities, for
instance, monuments under use currently (often for purposes different from their
original function) or monuments that are still used for performing religious rituals. It
has been realised that the active involvement of local communities or stakeholders
often assists in addressing many challenges faced in conserving and managing a
monument and its environs.
12.02 Local communities, wherever possible, may be engaged in decision-making
processes. They can be made aware of the basic aspects of conservation and
management of the monuments. Their engagement enables communities to
establish inextricable linkages (emotional rapport) with the monument and also leads
them to generate employment opportunities, which in turn helps in the sustenance of
local crafts and encouragement to undertake tourism related activities.44
13 Access for the Differently-abled persons
13.01 The benefits of visiting a monument should be available to all citizens of the country
including those who are differently-abled and are unable to enjoy normal access or
view of a monument.
13.02 Care should be taken to employ all means possible to facilitate access, provide
specially designed visitor amenities, as well as provide information and interpretation
of a monument to differently-abled individuals by employing appropriate means.
13.03 However, due care should be taken to provide facilities and access in a way that
such provisions do not, in any manner possible, compromise the authenticity and
integrity of the monument or create a visual chaos.
13.04 Whilst all due emphasis should be given to provide access to a monument for
differently-abled persons, in cases where such an access for the differently-abled
leads to major physical interventions within the monument’s structure that impacts its
integrity, it may be necessary to resort to the alternate option to create special areas
within or around the monument from where maximum view [of the monument] can be
provided / enjoyed.
Page 17 of 24

NATIONAL POLICY FOR THE CONSERVATION OF THE ANCIENT MONUMENTS, ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND REMAINS
14 New Interventions within a monument
14.01 Contrary to the belief that the monuments are frozen entities in space, they exhibit an
inherent dynamism as they continue to ‘evolve’ over periods of time. The evolution
may not always be in terms of changes in the fabric of the monument itself, but in
terms of their existence in the continually changing environment surrounding it. It
may be necessary at times to intervene within or around a monument from the point
of view of providing amenities for the comfort of its visitors or for the convenience and
function of the ASI staff or to address security concerns within and around the
monument.
14.02 Any such new intervention within or around the monument should be done with great
care and in a way that does not reduce its significance as well as values of its
environment in terms of being an incompatible intervention in terms of design,
material, colour or scale. For physical interventions to the environment within or
around a monument, preference should be given to materials that are compatible
with its historic building fabric or that are vernacular (local) which reflects the building
characteristics of the region to which the monument belongs to.
14.03 Any new intervention should, as far as possible, blend with the historic character of
the monument and its setting and should not offer contrast which distracts one’s
attention from the monument itself. New materials or construction techniques, if at all
to be employed for the construction of new buildings within a monument’s immediate
vicinity should be handled with great care and sensitivity, so that these do not
become eye-sores with the passage of time or spoil in any way the appearance of
the monument.
14.04 Designs and details of any intervention should be such that these are easy to
maintain, are self-sustainable and are least energy intensive.
14.05 Priority should be given to interventions that employ the reuse of ancillary or
secondary portions of a monument or complex. Whilst the main monument should
not be subjected to any reuse, ancillary or secondary structures within these
monuments or complexes may be considered for “sympathetic and compatible” re-
use subject to restrictions as prescribed in Articles 3.06, 14.02 and 14.03.
14.06 While interventions within the protected area of the monument are governed by the
policies that ASI follows or adopts, in the surrounding areas, particularly the
prohibited and regulated zone existing 300 metres beyond the protected limit of the
monuments, it is the National Monument Authority (NMA) which has been mandated
to consider matters of construction related activities and interventions. This process
also involves the framing of heritage bye-laws with respect to each protected
monument/site and such bye-laws cover aspects of heritage control to interventions
such as those related to building elevations, façades, drainage systems, civic
infrastructure, etc., that are to be placed within the defined zone.
15 Disaster Management
15.01 Monuments and archaeological sites are increasingly being subjected to a variety of
hazards (natural and human induced) thus exposing their vulnerability to threats and
risks. It is, therefore, important for all agencies concerned to be sufficiently prepared
to mitigate a disaster, should it strike, and to develop mechanisms for quick
Response and Recovery.
Page 18 of 24

NATIONAL POLICY FOR THE CONSERVATION OF THE ANCIENT MONUMENTS, ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND REMAINS
15.02 Adequate training should be provided to the monument in-charge to a) identify
disasters that can have deleterious impact on a monument on the basis of the past
history of disasters in the region, b) to undertake impact assessment by anticipating
and visualising disaster scenarios, c) to assess current levels of preparedness in
mitigating disasters, and d) to be able to coordinate with various agencies (Central,
State and local) for developing a quick response post-disaster programme and
actions.
15.03 Disaster Management Plan should be made as an important pre-requisite of the
Conservation Plan for a monument. It would be useful if vulnerability assessment of
each monument also becomes a part of the ASI database.
15.04 All adequate facilities possible should be provided within the monument, located at
appropriate locations, so as to give emergency treatment to the possible victim[s] of a
disaster and initial medical attention can be provided to him / her. Access and
evacuation routes, and evacuation spaces should be clearly demarcated and
indicated through appropriate signage (sign boards) for visitors so as to improve their
response mechanisms during a disaster. All efforts should be put in place to a)
safeguard the lives of people within the monument or living in its vicinity, and b) to
safeguard the monument.
15.05 Monuments and their structural members (material, construction technique, jointing,
etc.) should be ably assessed to determine their behaviour during and against
disasters. Should there be a need for necessary minimum retrofitting of a monument,
this may have to be carried out so as to provide sufficient consolidation to the
monument which will mitigate its possible impact during disasters.
Page 19 of 24

NATIONAL POLICY FOR THE CONSERVATION OF THE ANCIENT MONUMENTS, ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND REMAINS
ENDNOTES
1 The aspect related to the living aspect of a protected monument has only been attempted
for a religious monument in use (as per the notification) under Section 16 of the AMASR Act,
1958.
2 “Transcendence from the originally intended function” of a monument is to reflect the
elevated status of a monument, by declaring so, and does not, in any way whatsoever,
impact on its functional status.
3 As defined in Sections 3 and 4 of the AMASR (Amendment and Validation) Act. 2010
4 Great synergy is required between ASI and various other ministries and agencies at
Central, State and district levels to a) identify, b) conserve, and c) chalk out effective modes
of management and monitoring. Local planning authorities, NGOs and communities too will
have a greater role to play in this regard.
5 In a broader sense, the conservation activities shall include examination, documentation,
treatment, and care of monuments, archaeological sites and remains, supported by
adequate research, diagnostic studies, etc. Most importantly, it is an on going continuous
process which is realized through an Annual Conservation Plan (ACP) proposed and
renewed periodically for the sake of successful implementation.
6 (Ref: Articles 2.04 to 2.17 of the Policy).
7 All monuments with a high archaeological value, such as archaeological sites, ancient
monuments, rock edicts, caves, rock-cut structures should be preserved.
8 Repairing should be undertaken, as far as possible, using same / similar material, in terms
of specifications – colour, composition, etc., - and should, as far as possible, employ
traditional skills.
9 Monuments or their components with high architectural value may be restored. Mediaeval
monuments wherein geometric patterns are found missing, can be restored following
available evidences and traditional methods and techniques. Restoration could be achieved
by reassembly, reinstatement and/or the removal of inappropriate extraneous additions.
However, restoration should not attempt to recreate sculptures or inscriptions and
calligraphy in any monument. Restoration should also not be attempted in an archaeological
site, rock-cut caves, etc.
10 To the extent possible, restoration of a monument using original architectural members
should be favoured. Extreme care is to be exercised while undertaking such action, which
should not be undertaken unless the original form can reasonably be established (e.g. in
case of repetitive, symmetrical panels, parts of which are extant). While attempting
Anastylosis, the missing portions or elements should be replaced by simple members
maintaining the profile but devoid of any ornamentation to distinguish it from the original.
11 Adaptive reuse of secondary portion of a monument should be preferred to incorporate
functions such as providing visitor amenities, ASI field offices, stores, etc., subject to the
condition that the authenticity and integrity of the monument is least disturbed. No main
portion of the monument, however, should be subjected to any reuse or tampered by any
physical modification.
Page 20 of 24

NATIONAL POLICY FOR THE CONSERVATION OF THE ANCIENT MONUMENTS, ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND REMAINS
12 Reconstruction should only be attempted in rare cases wherein a monument is damaged
severely on account of a disaster (natural or human induced) or having lost its structural
stability leading to its sudden collapse. Reconstruction should be undertaken only when
there is sufficient documentation available to accurately reconstruct the monument. As far as
possible, the original material of the damaged monument should be salvaged and used for
reconstruction purposes.
13 Care, however, should be undertaken to undertake insertions in a way that these do not
compromise authenticity and integrity as well as aesthetics of the monument and follows the
principle of minimum intervention. In all circumstances such insertions should be
accompanied with clear indications that these are not a part of the original structure.
14 Scientific clearance should only be undertaken where the original structure has been
covered by later debris of no or little archaeological or artistic value. It should not be
sanctioned without the submission of full and detailed justification, and a detailed evaluation
of the exact nature of the remains that are likely to be uncovered, and their likely
archaeological or historical significance.
15 Consolidation should be done for the purpose of imparting strength to the fabric of a
monument by appropriate structural or chemical interventions.
16 Transplantation or Translocation of a monument is to be done in the rarest of rare
circumstances, and that it should only be done as a means for safeguarding the integrity of a
monument. Transplantation should be preceded by a comprehensive documentation, a
thorough recording of all events and circumstances that necessitate such intervention.
Relocation of the monument should be undertaken after careful analysis of the new site (to
which the relocation is proposed), and aspects like soil investigation and visual integrity.
17 For a detailed definition and understanding of Authenticity and Integrity, following
documents may also be referred: Venice Charter (1964), Nara Document on Authenticity
(1994), Burra Charter (1999), and World Heritage Centre’s Operational Guidelines (July,
2012).
18 Periodic inspection of a monument should be undertaken by the archaeological officers
and site in-charge in order to monitor the condition of the monument. Inspection notes
should be carefully recorded in order to highlight the condition of the monument and the
actions required for its conservation and safeguarding. These notes should be available at
each monument.
19 Conservation Plans should reflect adequate research on the monument and should take
into account all past conservation decisions and interventions. In reference to the policies of
ASI, a Conservation Plan should indicate conservation decisions regarding a monument that
reflects coordinated structural, scientific and horticultural inputs. Conservation plans should
include condition appraisal of a monument and should be peer reviewed, wherever possible.
20 It is important to interlink and integrate Site Management Plans for Monuments including
their setting with the Regional or Master Plans or Local Area Plans as developed by the
Town Planning Departments of the respective states or districts. Monuments and their
precincts, as identified by the National Monument Authority, should be earmarked on the
Master Plans / Local Area Plans as Special Protection Zones.
21 All information related to the past and on-going conservation works should be made
available at the site office for the benefit of understanding all past interventions. For this
Page 21 of 24

NATIONAL POLICY FOR THE CONSERVATION OF THE ANCIENT MONUMENTS, ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND REMAINS
purpose, the practice of maintaining a “Log book” at sites should be mandatory for all
monuments.
22 Provided that (a) when the function is of religious character it should be ensured that no
large scale religious or other similar activity will harm the monument in any way possible,
e.g., through the heavy influx of worshippers or performance of ritual; and (b) where in a
monument religious activity had ceased at the time of its protection as a monument, it cannot
be subsequently revived.
23 “Detail” means architectural members, surfaces, decorations and ornamentation
(structural and applied). Most monuments are embellished with irreplaceable and non-
renewable structural and non-structural ornamentation in the form of geometric patterns,
textures, sculptures, carvings, paintings, etc., made out of fragile and soft materials that are
vulnerable to natural and human-induced agents of decay. There are instances where such
forms of ornamentation have degenerated beyond recognition due to loss in their inherent
material strength.
24 The preservation of patina on the surface of a material should be carried out with the
essential identification of the extent of the patina. However, extraneous depositions on the
surface such as dust, dirt, soot, chemical salts, and later additions such as paint layers, etc.,
which are harmful to the original substrate must be removed along with the biological agents
without damaging the patina.
25 In case of a monument with high archaeological value, it may be incumbent upon the
archaeological officer to take a decision whether or not to allow replacements of geometric
patterns even if these are significantly eroded. Reasons for removing any material or
ornamentation must be duly recorded. Replacement should also precede extensive
documentation.
26 Establishing different layers of history will require careful evaluation of its historical phases
through research in order to establish the ‘original’ and the subsequent ‘layers’.
27 Elements of a monument, such as murals, sculptures, inscriptions and calligraphy should
not be restored. Monuments must be restored on the basis of documentary, archaeological
or architectural evidences, and not on the basis of any conjecture.
28 Monuments must be restored only on the basis of documentary, archaeological or
architectural evidences, and not on the basis of any conjecture.
29 While the purpose of reproducing an element of a monument is largely to safeguard the
original, design of the replaced element has to be thoroughly debated by the archaeological
officers and experts. This is critical in case of sculptures, images or paintings that have to be
removed for their safety. If at all the reproduced elements are to be reinstated to their
original location so as to maintain authenticity, their form and design should match the
replaced “deteriorated” member. They should not appear as they were originally designed or
constructed.
30 While considering a portion of a monument for reuse, care must be taken so that no major
portion of a monument with high archaeological / architectural value will be subjected to
reuse. Only ancillary portions of a monument may be considered for adaptive reuse.
31 India has the unique distinction of having living building crafts and traditions that continue
to be practiced in various parts of the country. In Sir John Marshall’s Conservation Manual
(1923), there is an inherent scepticism about contemporary craftsmanship that have the
Page 22 of 24

NATIONAL POLICY FOR THE CONSERVATION OF THE ANCIENT MONUMENTS, ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND REMAINS
ability to reproduce a sculpture or an architectural detail in an ancient monument whilst this
practice was allowed for interventions in mediaeval monuments. This practice though needs
a review and for this purpose, craftsmen, traditional masons, et al, would have to be
identified, and only after a thorough process of review and certification, etc., they may be
considered in replicating a detail in an ancient as well as in a mediaeval monument.
32 After due consideration, this could be given an institutional form under the aegis of ASI.
33 ASI should consider helping in building up institutions or partner with organisations and
NGOs to set up Centres of Excellence across the country to help in training crafts persons in
various disciplines. These Centres could also encourage and facilitate the local youth to
ensure that building and allied craft traditions do not die in this country and are regularly
utilized by ASI.
34 All conservation professionals should be encouraged to undertake on-site training with
experienced archaeologists, architects, engineers, scientists and horticulturists who are well
versed with on-site conditions and the various issues impacting the conservation and
management of a monument.
35 For this purpose, ASI should engage with institutions such as Indian Institutes of
Technology (IITs), Indian Institute of Science (IISc), Schools of Planning and Architecture
(SPAs), National Institute of Design (NID), etc., to name a few, or various conservation
related institutes and NGOs, to set up various capacity building programmes to be organized
periodically for of its officers.
36 It should be incumbent upon the ASI Circles and field officers to constantly work in close
cooperation with the Ministry of Tourism, State Departments of Tourism, various tourism
corporations of all the States and concerned agencies to promote and sustain tourism. Such
a co-operation is also necessary in ensuring a constant dialogue that leads to the effective
management and presentation of monument and sites across the country. In case a
monument is part of an urban precinct, involving other relevant stakeholders should also be
necessary and integral to its management.
37 While tourism is in itself desirable because monuments are preserved for people to visit
and appreciate them, yet the increase in visitor number leads to possible harm to the
monuments such as when some visitors’ cause damage to them (through graffiti or
vandalism or even theft) or by the inadvertent acceleration to the structural decay due to
human presence and pollution caused thereby.
38 In such cases it is important to have sufficient human resources available to monitor the
movement of visitors and to allow only the desired number within the monument. Computers
and web-based applications can also be used for online appointment for visiting the
monument which can be monitored by a dedicated team at that monument / site.
39 Facilities should be appropriately designed and integrated in a way that these do not
impact on the authenticity and integrity of the monument and its immediate surroundings.
40 Accuracy must be maintained in information and controversial data / information should be
avoided.
41 As far as possible, signages should have information in multiple languages (English, Hindi
and vernacular language) for the convenience of visitors, both domestic and foreign.
Page 23 of 24

NATIONAL POLICY FOR THE CONSERVATION OF THE ANCIENT MONUMENTS, ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES AND REMAINS
42 Illumination of a monument should be handled by a specialist lighting expert who has a
perceptive attitude to fixtures and has a deep understanding and sensitivity to be able to
highlight the monument’s inherent characteristic and features.
43 PPP mode entrusts greater responsibility on private organisations, donor agencies or even
individuals for the protection and maintenance of a monument.
44 Volunteers can be identified from within the local communities who may be engaged for
assisting the ASI in managing visitors, attain preventive conservation as well as assist in
ensuring security of the monument premises, etc.
Page 24 of 24