vv

af. uy. want
pr. M. RAMACHANDRAN

wrath fae are
fraior waa, Ae fxeeit-110108

Tel. . 23062377, Fax : 23061459
E-mail : secyurban@nic.in

araa, and

Secretary to the Government of India

No.K-1401 4/2512007-UT
Dated: 6**October, 2009.

Dear Chief Secretary,

As you are qware, the Government of India has formulated National Urban
Transport Policy (NUTP) in April, 2006. NUTP, 2006 calls for concerted efforts to
strengthening capability at the institutional level and individual level in order to
undertake the task of development and implementation of sustainable urban transport

systems. Capacity Building for various aspects of urban transport !s essential as the
problems associated with these are of relatively recent origin in India.

2. Keeping in view the problems associated with urban transport and for promoting
improved knowledge and capacity to undertake comprehensive urban transport
planning, this Ministry has formulated a scheme for “Capacity Building in Urban
Transport for all cities in India in line with NUTP, 2006” for better implementation during
the 11" plan period. The scheme will continue in 42"" plan period also. The
components © this scheme include training, education, conference, journals,
institutional development etc. The Scheme envisages setting UP of Unified
Metropolitan Transport Authority (UMTA) and Urban Transport Cell in various
cities/ULBs to carry forward the urban transport agenda. Accordingly, it provides for
capital support for setting UP these institutions in various mission cities for providing
technical support to State/city Governments subject to the condition that urban local
body will have a clear and definite financial stake in establishing these bodies.

3. The detailed guidelines for the scheme are attached as Annexure-l. The same
are also available in the Ministry's website, www,urbanindia.nic.1n-

. 1 would, therefore, request you to direct the concerned officers to avail the
penefits of the scheme of Capacity Building in Urban Transport for resolving urban
transport issues associated with urban mobility and enhancing capability for undertaking
4 coordinated approach to improve the problems associated with them.

with regards,
Yours sincerely,

Law

(Dr.M. Ramachandran)
Encl: As above.

To

All Chief Secretaries of State Governments/UTS
(As per list attached).

MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
NIRMAN BHAVAN, NEW DELHI-110108


-2-

Copy to:-

1. Principal Secretary (UD), Principal Secreta
(Transport)/all States Govl/UTs.

Municipal Commissioners (65 Mission cities)

JS&FA, M/o Urban Development, Nirman Bhawan, New Delhi.

Economic Advisor, M/o Urban Development, Nirman Bhawan, New Debhi,

MD/RITES, MD&CEO/UMTC, MD/DMRC, MD/BMRC, MD/KMRC, MD/CMRC.

Executive secretary, IUT for wide publicity amongst its members.

OSD(MRTS)
Tel. 23061114

ry (LSG), Principal Secretary

Oakwn

Copy also to:

1. Member Engineering, Railway Board, M/o Railways, Govt. of India,
New Delhi-110001.

2. Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation, Rajeev Gandhi
Safdarjung Airport, New Delhi-1 10003.

OSD(MRTS)
Tel. 23061114


2 AAR a

Annexure-]

Scheme for Capacity Building in Urban Transport
1.0 Introduction
1.1 Like in other developing countries, cities in India have also witnessed a rapid

growth in the number of personal motor vehicles leading to severe congestion and air

-Pollution in the cities, So far, attempts to mitigate these problems have largely been in

the form of increased supply of transportation services, whether they be in the form of

Metro Rail systems, expanded bus: services, road widening, construction of flyovers or
similar other initiatives.

1.2 Such measures have only a limited impact and can not serve the purpose of

improving mobility in urban areas on a sustainable basis. Improving overall mobility

Tequires several other ‘measures to be undertaken in a coordinated manner, such as
improved integration of land use and transport planning, integration of Public transport
systems, demand restraint Measures, etc. Unfortunately the capability for undertaking
such a coordinated approach to improving moviiity anda complete understanding of such
issues is lacking at the State Government or city level. It is in this context that this
scheme for capacity building in urban transport has been formulated for implementation
during the 11" Plan period and would continue in 12th Plan period also.

1.3. Though the scheme would be applicable to all the cities across India, focus shall

be on JNNURM Mission cities, cities with a population of 5 lakh and above (2001 census)

-and State capitals in Ist phase.

2.0 Components of the capacity building

This scheme for Capacity building has the following components:
2.1 Training |

e Identification and strengthening of regional centers for training in urban
transport planning.
¢ Development of training curriculum and other training materials.

¢ Conduct of training programs.


2.3 Conferences and Journals
° Annual Conference on urban transport to be held in India.
* Nomination of Indian Professionals to Conferences abroad,
° Professional Journal on urban transport, ;

* Subscription to International Journals on Urban Transport.
2.4 Institutional Development

e Development of legal and administrative frameworks.
° Development of manuals, codes and standards.
* Development of a national database.

national level] instituts for Coordinating Tesearch and dissemination of new
information,

Urban Transport Cell in various mission cities.


3.4 The approximate cost Of this component would be about Rs.37.8 Crore over five


The nominee should have written a paper to be presented at the Conference
Which should have been accepted by the Conference Organizer, and the
quality of the Paper should be found to be of the high order by the Selection
Committee, Ministry of Urban Development.


or Central Govt.

The International Conference should be a well known and Professionally

recognized Conference i.e. held at regular intervals of not le
years.

ss than once in 2

5.7 The costs to be provided would cover

Which the nominee belongs or the nominee himself.
5.8

The total cost of this component is estimated to be Rs.5.3 crore over five years,

6.0 Institutional Development

6.1 It is well recognized that a number of other Supporting activities need to be
implemented in order to develop overall Capacity for urban transport in the country. This
includes the development of legal and administrative frameworks, a number of manuals
and codes, a national database, a mechanism to coordinate research sponsorship and
dissemination of research results, mechanisms to provide technical Support to the
State/city Governments, as well as an institutional mechanism for Research and
Development and to certify thé safety of rail based and other externally guided transit
" systems. -

6.2 Institutional capacity would Primarily involve creating a pool of knowledge and a
knowledge management center that would sustain and enhance expertise as well as
facilitate more informed planning as well as formulation of right mitigation Strategies. It
would also sponsor regular research to help formulate the right mitigation Strategies,
without merely adopting what other countries have tried. The Institute of Urban
Transport (India), an existing institute under the purview of the Ministry of Urban

Development would be suitably strengthened under this scheme to discharge this

responsibility. It would be built up fo serve as a National level facility to provide


the experience with such technologies, It would, in fact be a com

prehensive repository of
the best practices in the field, However,

besides above the Ministry of Urban
Development would also Support the individual Projects under the scheme which

would assist in better implementation. Such cases would be governed by separate

guidelines,

6.3 The virtual lack of a database on urban transport statistics has severely

impact of the different initiatives that have been taken, The IUT (India) would build up a:
database for use in planning, research, training, etc in the field of urban transport.
6.4 The need for Strengthening of Safety certification agency is being felt for metro

financial stake in establishing these bodies.

6.6 All these aciivities would be Supported through suitable consultancy
arrangements, where required, and the consultants would be selected through an open and
transparent process.

6.7 The total cost of this component is estimated to be Rs.5] -4 crore over five years.


Coordination and wil] Teport progress from time fo time to the MoUD, The PIU Will also
S€rvice the Steering Committee.

Outcome of the Scheme in Which Economic Advisor and Tepresentative of Finance
Ministry Will also be invited.

. eke ye


Year wise funds requirement for Capacity Building Scheme for Urban

Transport
2009-10 Rs.13 crore
2010-11 Se Rs.20 crore
2011-12 Rs.25 crore
2012-13 Rs.25 crore
2013-14 Rs.16 crore

_ Total Rs.99 crore
