National Innovations in
Climate Resilient Agriculture (NICRA)
Indian Council of Agricultural Research
Implemented by
Natural Resource Management Division (ICAR), New Delhi
Coordinated by
ICAR - Central Research Institute for Dryland Agriculture (CRIDA), Hyderabad

Background
The impacts of climate change are global, but countries like India are highly vulnerable as large
population depends on agriculture. The year 2016 ranks as the warmest year, 16 of the 17 warmest
years in the 136 year record all have occurred since 2001. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change (IPCC) in its recent report (SR 15) indicated that global average temperature is already more
than 1°C higher than the pre-industrial era and every fraction of a degree temperature rise makes a big
difference. At the current rate of emission, the world will reach 1.5°C warming by 2030 & 2052. The
predicted temperature rise for India is in the range of 0.5–1.2°C by 2020, 0.88–3.16°C by 2050 and
1.56–5.44°C by the year 2080. Studies showed significant negative impacts of climate change, predicted
to reduce yields by 4.5 to 9.0%, depending on the magnitude and distribution of warming. Agriculture
sector is contributing about 17.4% of India’s GDP, a 4.5-9.0% negative impact on production implies a
cost of climate change to be roughly up to 1.5% of GDP per year. Enhancing agricultural productivity,
therefore, is critical for ensuring food and nutritional security for all, particularly the resource poor
small and marginal farmers who would be affected most. In the absence of mitigation and adaptation
strategies, the consequences of long-term climage change could be even more severe on the livelihood
security of the poor. Therefore climate change adaptation is no longer an option, it is a necessary. With
this background the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) under the Ministry of Agriculture
and Farmers’ Welfare, Government of Imdia launched a flagship network project ‘National Innovations
in Climate Resilient Agriculture’ (NICRA) during 2011.
Climate Resilient Agriculture
There has been a significant rise in the frequency of extreme weather events in recent years affecting
farm level productivity and impacting staple food grains availability at the national level. Within a
season, severe droughts and floods are being experienced in the same region posing serious problems
to the farmers, agricultural scientists and extension staff. Fall in yield leads to shortage of food grains,
price rise and inflation affecting poor the most. Therefore, it is of utmost importance to enhance the
resilience of Indian Agriculture to climate change. Both application of improved technologies and new
policies will contribute to resilience. There is also abundant traditional wisdom among farmers to cope
with climate variability which are being captured and documented in the project.
Since climate change poses complex challenges like multiple abiotic stresses on crops and livestock,
shortage of water, land degradation and loss of biodiversity, a focused and long term research is
required to find solutions to the problems specific to the country. The necessary infrastructure to carry
out basic and strategic research has to be put in place. At the same time, there is a scope to improve
the resilience of agriculture by application of existing knowledge and technology on farmers’ field
as a holistic package. Hence, in NICRA Project it is contemplated both to develop climate resilient
technologies through short term and long term research, and also demonstrate the existing technologies
on farmers’ fields for enhancing the resilience
The scheme attempts to develop and promote climate resilient technologies in agriculture which will
address vulnerable areas of the country. The outputs of the scheme will help the districts and regions
prone to extreme weather conditions like droughts, floods, frost, heat waves, etc. to cope with such
events. Although the target area of the scheme are all climatically vulnerable regions of the country,
small and marginal farmers in rainfed, coastal and hill areas will benefit more in view of the focused
attention in these regions.

Objectives
• To enhance the resilience of Indian agriculture to climatic variability and climate change through
strategic research on adaptation and mitigation.
• To validate and demonstrate climate resilient technologies on farmer’s fields.
• To strengthen the capacity of scientists and other stakeholders in climate resilient agriculture.
• To draw policy guidelines for wide scale adoption of resilience technologies and options.
Components of the Scheme
• Strategic research through network, sponsored and competitive grants.
• Technology demonstration and dissemination.
• Knowledge management.
• Capacity building.
In strategic research component, both short term and long term research programs with a national
perspective have been taken up to evolve adaptation and mitigation strategies in crops, horticulture,
natural resources, livestock, fisheries and poultry. About 41 ICAR Institutes representing different sectors
of agriculture are undertaking climate change research in a network mode focusing the respective theme
areas. Research proposals addressing critical gaps not covered in the strategic research component but
have a major bearing of the productivity of principal commodities in that region are being funded
through competitive and sponsored grants. So far, 18 Sponsored and 33 competitive projects have been
funded to undertake critical areas of climate change research.
Simultaneously the existing technologies to cope with current climate variability is being demonstrated
in 151 climatically vulnerable districts through 121 Krishi Vignan Kendras (KVKs), 23 Coordinating
Centers of the All India Coordinated Research Project on Dryland Agriculture (AICRPDA) and 7 ICAR
Institutes.
Unique Features of the Scheme
• Unique project which brings all the sectors of agriculture viz., crops, horticulture, livestock,
fisheries, natural resources and extension secientists on one common platform to address the
impending issue of climate change.
• Critical assessment of different districts in the country for vulnerability to climatic stresses and
extreme events.
• Installation of state-of-the-art equipment like flux towers for continuous measurement of green
house gases in large field areas to understand the impact of management practices on emissions.
• Rapid and large scale screening of germplasm including wild relative for drought, flood and heat
tolerance through phenomics platforms for identification of promising genetic material and early
development and release of heat / drought / flood tolerant crop varieties.
• Downscaling of climate change projections to study its impact on crops, livestock, fisheries and
natural resources through integrated modeling approach.
• Comprehensive field evaluation of new and emerging approaches of crop cultivation like aerobic
rice, Conservation Agriculture practices etc., for their contribution to reduce the GHG emissions.

• Special emphasis to livestock and fishery sectors including aquaculture which have not received
enough attention in climate change research in the past. Identification and characterization of
adaptive traits in the indigenous resilient breeds will be the most useful step.
• Thorough understanding of crop-pest / pathogen relationship and emergence of new biotypes due
to climate change.
• Simultaneous up-scaling of the outputs both through KVKs and the National Mission on Sustainable
Agriculture for wider adoption by the farmers.
TECHNICAL PROGRAM
Strategic Research
Activity Institution and focus area
Integrated systems modeling involving crops, IARI (wheat, rice), CRIDA (maize, pigeonpea), CPRI (potato),
natural resources, fisheries and livestock for IIHR & DOGR (onion), NCIPM (pests & diseases of major field and
impact assessment and identifying adaptation horticulture crops)
strategies at regional level for near and long- CRIDA (climate, rainwater, soil carbon), IISWC (basin level impacts)
term downscaled scenarios IIWM (groundwater), IISS (soil data), NBSSLUP (carbon stocks)
CMFRI (marine fisheries), CIBA (brackish water aquaculture)
IIFSR (irrigated farming systems in IGP), NEH (hill farming system in NEH
region), CRIDA (rainfed farming system)
Real time district / block level agro advisories CRIDA (through 25 AICRPAM network centers by piloting agro-
for minimizing risk due to climate variation advisories and in 121 KVKs)
Strengthening real time data capture on crop IARI, CRIDA (through its 23 AICRIPAM network centers)
health through satellite data reception system &
integrate the output for agro-advisories
On-station and on-farm testing of contingency CRIDA (through AICRPDA network in 23 agro-ecological sub-regions
plans on real time basis to cope with monsoon and in selected KVKs)
variability / extreme weather events
Genetic enhancement of tolerance to climatic IARI (irrigated crops-rice & wheat), CRIDA (rainfed crops-maize,
stresses in major food and horticultural crops pigeonpea) for drought and heat stresses
through phenomics- assisted and field- IIPR (chickpea, greengram, blackgram and lentil for climatic stresses)
phenotyping IIMR (drought, heat and multiple abiotic stress in maize)
IIWBR (wheat for terminal heat stress)
NRCPB (transgenic wheat for heat responsive genes)
NRRI (identification of CO responsiveness genotypes and genetic
2
enhancement for drought, submergence and salinity in rice)
IIRR (rice genotypes for heat tolerance and nitrogen use efficiency)
NEH (rice & maize - heat, drought & submergence, tomato - drought
tolerant for north east regions)
NIASM (mungbean, chickpea & pigeonpea for drought, heat & salinity
tolerance), IIHR (mango & tomato for heat and drought) DOGR (onion),
IIVR (tomato for water logging & high temperature), CITH (temperate
fruits – apple & wall nut) for climatic stresses)
NBPGR (rice and wheat for drought and heat)
IIHR (mango for temperature and moisture stress)

Activity Institution and focus area
Monitoring of GHG emissions through flux IARI (irrigated rice-wheat in IGP and transplanted rice-rice system in
towers or field measurements and establish South-East peninsula), NRRI (rice-based production systems, irrigated
GHG inventory for different production and rainfed in coastal and central regions), CRIDA (rainfed - maize,
systems pigeonpea, blackgram), IIFSR (IFS based systems), CSSRI (rice-wheat
system in NW region), IGFRI (grassland and open grazing systems),
NEH (NE zone production systems), NDRI (livestock), CIBA (aquaculture)
Adaptation and mitigation through CRIDA (rainwater management through watershed approach; carbon
(a) improved crop management, enhanced and nutrient budgeting in rainfed system), IARI (carbon and nutrient
water productivity and nutrient use efficiency budgeting in rice-wheat), IIFSR and CRIDA (assessment of mitigation
potential of IFS approach - irrigated and rainfed)
NRRI (mitigation potential of improved management practices and
inputs in rice cultivation), NEH (soil and rainwater management in
hill production systems of NE region), IIWM, CRIDA (improved water
productivity in irrigated (IIWM) and rainfed (CRIDA) production
systems through rainwater harvesting and groundwater recharge),
RCER (management of high intensity rain events in middle IGP for kharif
crops and low temperature in eastern IGP for maize & boro rice)
CSSRI (management of salinity and sea water intrusion due to climatic
variability in coastal regions)
(b) Enhancing carbon sequestration and CRIDA (CA, C-sequestration and nutrient use efficiency in rainfed
adaptation potential through Conservation cropping systems), CRIDA, CAZRI (quantification of C-sequestration
Agriculture (CA), Soil Water Management potential in selected agroforestry systems in IGP, semi-arid and arid
(SWM) and agroforestry zones), NEH (C-sequestration through biomass recycling (e.g. biochar)
and agroforestry modules in NE states), IIHR (CA and C-sequestration
in horticultural crops), IISS (management practices for enhanced
C-sequestration in vertisols), IGFRI (C-sequestration in relation to
grazing intensity in range lands)
(c) Enhanced energy use efficiency in CIAE, CRIDA (mitigation potential of enhanced energy use efficiency
agriculture through precision farming)
Pest and disease dynamics in changing NCIPM, CRIDA (validation and refinement of pest forecast systems and
climate, development and validation of pest integration with short-term and medium term weather forecast)
forewarning models and mobile applications IIRR, NCIPM (rice-BPH, stem borer and leaf folder), IIWBR (wheat
yellow rust), CRIDA, IIHR (tri-trophic interactions of plant-pests-natural
enemy to eCO and eTemp in rainfed and horticultural crops)
2
IIHR (tomato), RCER (mango), DOGR (onion)
Validation of unique genes and proteins NDRI (cattle and buffalo),
for use as biomarkers of climate resilience; NEH (pig and poultry)
Physiological, genomics and nutrigenomic IIVR (cattle)
approaches for better feed conversion
efficiency and enhanced productivity;
amelioration of thermal stress using feed
supplements and custom designed shelter
systems
Climate variability and livestock vectors, NIVEDI (livestock diseases surveillance)
pests & disease dynamics IVRI (livestock diseases resistance traits)
Adaptation strategies in large and small NDRI, IVRI (cattle and buffalo)
ruminants and poultry to thermal stress CIRG (goat), CSWRI, CRIDA, CAZRI (sheep), DPR in partnership with
through nutritional, shelter and environmental TANUVAS (poultry)
manipulations

Activity Institution and focus area
Impact assessment of climatic variations on CMFRI (marine), CIFRI (inland), CIBA (brackishwater aquaculture)
ecosystem responses and development of CIFA (freshwater aquaculture), DCFR (coldwater fisheries)
adaptation and mitigation strategies
Carbon sequestration CIFRI (inland), CMFRI (sea weeds), CAFRI (agro forestry systems) &
IIHR, CRIDA (perennial horticultural system & other plants)
Modeling climate change impacts on CMFRI (marine), CIBA (brackishwater aquaculture), CIFRI (inland)
abundance of key fisheries species,
reproduction, behavior and distribution
Assessment of macro and micro-level CRIDA, NIAP (socio economics aspects and ecosystem services)
vulnerabilities and adaptation assessment.
Development & validation of climate resilient
indicators
Policy research for facilitating adaptation and CRIDA (economic analysis of different adaptation options),
innovations in utilization of global adaptation NIAP (mainstreaming adaptation policies and to evolve strategies
funds for utilization of global adaptation funds to bring resilience to Indian
agriculture)
Technology Demonstration
It is being implemented in farmer participatory mode in 151 climatically most vulnerable districts of
the country. The objective of this component is to enhance resilience in agriculture by demonstrating
site specific climate resilient agricultural practices and to adopt these practices by farmers to cope with
climate variability. The process of finalizing the demonstration package have the following steps viz.,
Analysis of climate constraints of village based on long term data, Assessment of natural resources status
of the village, Identification of major production systems, Studying of existing institutional structures
and identify the gaps and Consultations with the community to finalize the interventions.

The interventions covered the following four major modules:
Module I: Natural Resource Management
Interventions related to in-situ moisture conservation, biomass mulching, residue incorporation instead
of burning, brown and green manuring, water harvesting and recycling for supplemental irrigation,
improved drainage in flood prone areas, conservation tillage where appropriate, artificial ground water
recharge and water saving irrigation methods.
Module II: Crop Production
Introducing drought/temperature tolerant varieties, advancement of planting dates of rabi crops in areas
with terminal heat stress, water saving paddy cultivation methods (SRI, aerobic, direct seeding), frost
management in horticulture through fumigation, staggered community nurseries for delayed monsoon,
custom hiring centers for timely completion of farm operations, location specific intercropping systems
with high sustainable yield index.
Module III: Livestock and Fisheries
Use of community lands for fodder production during droughts/floods, augmentation of fodder
production through improved planting material, improved fodder/feed storage methods, fodder
enrichment, prophylaxis, improved shelters for reducing heat stress in livestock, management of fish
ponds/tanks during water scarcity and excess water and promotion of livestock component as a climate
change adaptation strategy.
Module IV: Institutional Interventions
Institutional interventions either by strengthening the existing ones or initiating new ones relating to
community seed bank, fodder bank, commodity groups, custom hiring centre, collective marketing
group, introduction of weather index based insurance and climate literacy through a village weather
station. The program also aims at development of an enabling mechanism at the village level for
continued adoption of such practices in a sustainable manner.
Module on use of ICT for knowledge empowerment of the communities in terms of climate risk
management is also being implemented in some KVKs for generation of locally relevant content and
its dissemination in text and voice enabled formats. As an outcome of this exercise location specific
climate resilient practices and constraints in its adoption are being documented.
Capacity Building
Experiences of NICRA project are to be disseminated to all concerned development departments
for upscaling the interventions across the country. Capacity building on various resilient practices/
technologies, location specific mitigation and adaptation strategies, use of farm machinery, seed bank,
fodder bank etc. are being taken up to enhance capacities of communities for better adoption of resilient
practices. During the past six years, 10,130 capacity building programs have been organized benefiting
4.2 lakh stakeholders across the country.

Coordination, Monitoring & Review
Strategic, sponsored and competitive grants component of the scheme is being monitored by an Expert
Committee with a Chairman and a panel of expert members representing different thematic areas and
sectors to review the progress at various partner institutes. Technology Demonstration Component
is reviewed by four Zonal Monitoring Committees (ZMC) with members from SAUs, ATARI, ICAR
nominee etc. Besides this the High Level Monitoring Committee (HLMC) chaired by Secretary (DARE)
and DG, ICAR with representatives from various ministries and line departments provides directions to
the project.
Outputs
• Climate resilient technologies in terms of climate smart crop varieties, livestock breeds and
management practices to bring climate resilience in agriculture.
• Improved preparedness for minimizing the impact of climate variability on Indian agricultural
through site specific technology demonstration.
• Policy framework for promoting climate resilient agriculture, particularly among small and
marginal farmers.
• Infrastructure at key research institutes for climatic change research.
• Adequately trained scientific man power to take up climate change research in the country.
• Empower farmers to cope with climate variability.
Outcome
• Enhanced resilience of agricultural production in vulnerable regions of the country.
Contact Information
The Deputy Director General (NRM)
Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR)
Krishi Anusandhan Bhawan II, Pusa, New Delhi – 110 012 (India)
Pnone : 011-25848364; Fax: 011-25848366
Email: ddg.nrm@icar.gov.in
The Director
ICAR-Central Research Institute for Dryland Agriculture (CRIDA)
Santoshnagar, Hyderabad – 500 059, Telanagana State (India)
Phone : 040-24530177; Fax : 040-24531802
Email: nicra1.crida@gmail.com; director.crida@icar.gov.in
www.nicra-icar.in
8102
feirB
ARCIN