National Urban Rental Housing Policy
(Draft)
October, 2015
Government of India
Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation

DRAFT
Table of Contents
Abbreviations: ........................................................................................................................................ 3
Definitions: ............................................................................................................................................. 5
Preamble ................................................................................................................................................. 7
1. Introduction .................................................................................................................................... 8
2. Historical context of policy interventions towards Housing in India: ........................................ 8
3. Initiatives of Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation (MoHUPA):........................... 9
5. Need for Rental Housing Policy: ................................................................................................. 10
6. Issues and challenges: ................................................................................................................ 12
7. National Urban Rental Housing Policy (NURHP), 2015 ............................................................. 14
7.1. Vision ............................................................................................................................................ 14
7.2. Policy Objectives: ........................................................................................................................ 14
7.3. Target groups ............................................................................................................................... 15
8. Demand and Supply side interventions ..................................................................................... 16
9. Role of Central Government: ....................................................................................................... 17
10. Role of State Government: .......................................................................................................... 18
11. Role of Urban Local Bodies (ULBs): ........................................................................................... 21
12. Role of other institutions/entities ............................................................................................... 22
13. Way forward: ................................................................................................................................. 22
List of Annexures
Annexure: I - Rental yield across various countries ......................................................................... 24
Annexure: II - Case studies on Rental Housing from across the World .......................................... 25
Annexure: III - Do’s and Don’ts for States ......................................................................................... 35
Annexure: IV - Percentage of Rental Housing in Developed Countries .......................................... 37
Annexure: V – Models on Rental Housing ......................................................................................... 38
Annexure: VI – Criteria that may be adopted in identification of target groups for prioritization 40
Annexure: VII - References ................................................................................................................. 41
Page 2 of 41

DRAFT
Abbreviations:
BSUP : Basic Services for Urban Poor
CAA : Constitutional Amendment Act
CBO : Community Based Organisation
CSR : Corporate Social Responsibility
EWS : Economically Weaker Section
ECB : External Commercial Borrowing
FSI : Floor Space Index
FAR : Floor Area Ratio
FDI : Foreign Direct Investment
GDP : Gross Domestic Product
GoI : Government of India
HFI : Housing Finance Institutions
HRA : House Rent Allowance
IHSDP : Integrated Housing and Slum Development Programmes
ISHUP : Interest Subsidy scheme for Housing the Urban Poor
JnNURM : Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission
LIG : Lower Income Group
MDRH : Market Driven Rental Housing
MoF : Ministry of Finance
MoHUPA : Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation
MIS : Management Information System
MFI : Micro Finance Institution
NGO : Non Government Organisation
NSS : National Service Scheme
NSSO : National Sample Survey Organisation
NULM : National Urban Livelihoods Mission
NURHP: National Urban Rental Housing Policy
PG : Paying Guest
PPP : Public Private Partnership
PRH : Public Rental Housing
PSU : Public sector Undertaking
RCA : Rent Control Act
RRY : Rajiv Rinn Yojana
RAY : Rajiv Awas Yojana
REITs : Real Estate Investment Trusts
Page 3 of 41

DRAFT
RRMC : Residential Rental Management Company
RHP : Rental Housing Policy
RWA : Residential Welfare Association
SPV : Special Purpose Vehicle
SRH : Social Rental Housing
SRHP : State Rental Housing Policy
SUH : Shelter for Urban Homeless
TFRH : Task Force on Rental Housing
ULB : Urban Local Bodies
UT : Union Territories
Page 4 of 41

DRAFT
Definitions:
1. “Formal rental housing” means rental housing based on an agreement entered into between the
owner and the tenant, which is registered with the competent authority under the law for the time
being in force.
2. “Informal rental housing” means rental housing which is not based on an agreement entered into
between the owner and the tenant, and is not registered with the competent authority under the law
for the time being in force.
3. ‘Market Driven/Private Rental Housing’ means rental housing provided by individual owners or
institutions/entities or private rental housing operators (such as hostel owners) wherein owners
finance the construction and management of rental housing, independent of government
assistance.
4. “Need Based Rental Housing” means rental housing based on need/requirement of different groups
(such as students, teachers, working women/men, nurses, construction workers, migrants) who
have a source of income, but find it difficult to afford the rent towards rental housing.
5. “Owner” means a person who, for the time being is receiving, or is entitled to receive, the rent of any
residential rental premises, whether on his own account or on account of or on behalf of, or for the
benefit of, any other person, or as a trustee, guardian or receiver of any person/institution who
would so receive the rent or be entitled to receive the rent, if the premises were let to a tenant, and
shall include his successor-interest;
6. “Public Rental Housing” means social rental housing that is owned by the government, local
authority or its entitities;
7. “Property Manager” means a person or company who is employed by the owner to manage the
residential rental premises and who represents the owner in his dealings with the tenant.
8. “Rental Housing” means a property occupied by someone other than the owner, for which the tenant
pays a periodic mutually agreed rent to the owner.
9. “Residential Rental Premises” means any building or part of a building which is or is intended to be
let separately for the purpose of residence of the tenant and includes-
(a) any fixtures and fittings in such premises for the beneficial enjoyment thereof of the tenant; and
(b) the garden, grounds, parking, garage, out-houses etc. let out along-with the premises to the
tenant.
Page 5 of 41

DRAFT
10. Explanation:- For the purposes of this definition it is clarified that the definition of ‘residential rental
premises’ does not include hotels, lodging houses, dharamshalas or inn etc“Shelter” means a
covered structure that provides protection from the weather or danger for lodging of persons on a
temporary basis with basic minimum civic facilities such as water, sanitation, electricity etc.
11. “Social Rental Housing (SRH)” means rental housing in which the rent is set at a level below the
market rates to make it affordable for poor people (Economically Weaker Section & Low Income
Group). It may be owned and managed by the government, local authorities, public sector
undertakings, non-profit organizations, private or any others charitable institutions.
12. “Incentives” means a payment or concession to stimulate greater output or investment in rental
housing, which may be fiscal and/or non-fiscal incentives (such as grants, low-interest loans, tax
abatements etc.) that promotes housing to be accessible to those that cannot afford market rents.
13. “Tenant” means a person who has entered into a rental housing agreement, for any residential rental
premises, with the owner, in lieu of rent payable towards the same.
14. Below Poverty Line (BPL) means a person holding a BPL card issued by the State Government from
time to time1.
15. Economically Weaker Section (EWS) means households having an annual income up to Rs.
3,00,000 (Rupees Three Lakhs)*.
16. Low Income Group (LIG) means households having an annual income above Rs.3,00,000 (Rupees
Three Lakhs) and up to Rs.6,00,000 (Rupees Six Lakhs)*.
*States/UTs shall have the flexibility to redefine the annual income criteria as per local conditions in
consultation with the Centre2.
1 Report of the Expert Group to Review the Methodology for Measurement of Poverty, Government of India Planning
Commission, June, 2014
*Over the year’s methodology for estimation of poverty were based on the various recommendations made by different
Working Group/Task Force/Expert Groups consisting of eminent experts in the field of poverty such as Lakdawala
Committee (1993) Tendulkar Committee (2005), Hashim Committee (May 2010) and Rangarajan Committee (June 2012).
The poverty lines in 2011-12 at the national level are expressed as monthly per capita consumption expenditure of Rs. 972
in rural areas and Rs. 1407 in urban areas, both at 2011-12 prices
2 Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana, Housing For All (Urban), Scheme Guidelines-2015, Ministry of HUPA
Page 6 of 41

DRAFT
Preamble
Housing is one of the basic necessities of life and the right to housing and adequate shelter is
guaranteed in the Directive Principles of State Policy enshrined in the Constitution of India. The
rapid pace of urbanisation in India has resulted in severe shortage of housing and basic services
like potable water, well laid out drainage system, sewerage network, sanitation facilities, electricity,
roads and appropriate disposal of solid waste. The urban housing shortage was estimated to be
18.78 million3 during the 12th Plan period with consequent increase resulting from intense
urbanisation in future years. Provision of affordable housing has been a priority area for the
Government of India; however, providing housing to all on ownership basis is difficult and may not
be possible. The fact that a large percentage of households live in congested condition, indicates
that a large section of population find decent and adequate housing unaffordable.
The growing urban housing shortages in India provide the rationale for policy focus on promotion of
rental housing in urban areas which has been recognized by the National Urban Housing and
Habitat Policy (NUHHP), 2007. This policy intends to promote sustainable development of
ownership as well as rental housing stock in the country with a view to ensuring equitable supply of
rental housing at affordable prices to all sections of society. Given the magnitude of housing
shortage and budgetary constraints of both the Central and State Governments, it is amply clear
that efforts of Public Sector alone will not suffice in fulfilling the rental housing demand. In view of
this scenario, the National Urban Rental Housing Policy (NURHP), 2015 focuses on a multipronged
approach such as enabling legal and regulatory measures, encourage involvement of Private
Sector, Cooperative, Non-Governmental Sector, Industrial Sector (for labour housing) and the
Services/Institutional Sector (for employee housing), to promote rental housing. The Policy seeks
to promote various types of public-private partnerships for promotion of rental housing in the
country which will act as a catalytic force to achieve the overall goal of Housing for All by 2022.
3 Report of the Technical Group On Urban Housing Shortage (TG-12) Urban Housing Shortage (TG-12) (2012-17), Ministry
of Housing And Urban Poverty Alleviation, Government of India
Page 7 of 41

DRAFT
National Urban Rental Housing Policy, 2015
1. Introduction
1.1. Urbanization is an undisputed driver of the process of economic growth. In tune with the global trend,
India is undergoing through a process of rapid urbanisation. Whereas the total population of India has
grown 3.4 times during the period 1951 to 2011, the urban population has grown 6 times during the
same period i.e. from 62.4 million (1951) to 377.1 million (2011). The increasing pace of the
urbanisation process could be gauged from the fact that whereas the overall population of the country
grew by 17.64% during the decade 2001-2011, the urban population increased by 31.8% during this
period.
1.2. Housing is not mere provision of four walls and a roof but it also requires to be supplemented by
access to basic amenities such as water and sanitation, thereby offering a sense of privacy, safety,
dignity and better living. The right to housing and adequate shelter as guaranteed in the Directive
Principles of State Policy enshrined in the Constitution places an obligation on the Governments to
ensure housing for all. With the rapidly increasing population of urban areas, the gap between supply
and demand of the housing has been ever widening with increasing prices of real estate sector.
Urbanisation in India is characterised with massive shortage of housing specifically towards the
Economically Weaker Section (EWS) and Lower Income Groups (LIG), who are heavily dependent on
governmental support for housing.
2. Historical context of policy interventions towards Housing in India:
2.1. The policies of urban development and housing in India have had a long journey since independence.
In early 1950s, the pressure of urban population and lack of housing along with basic services was an
issue of great concern to the Government as well as to the civil society. It has generally been the
responsibility of States to intervene towards meeting the housing requirements of the vulnerable
sections of society and to create an enabling environment for provision of shelter to all on a
sustainable basis.
2.2. As part of the First Five Year Plan (1951-56), concrete governmental initiatives began with a focus on
institution-building and housing for weaker sections of society. Government undertook construction of
houses for Government employees and industrial workers (through Industrial Housing Scheme). The
urban land was getting scarce for provision of housing especially for the middle and low income
Page 8 of 41

DRAFT
groups, resulting in the government enacting the Urban Land (Ceiling & Regulation) Act, 1976.
Housing and Urban Development Corporation (HUDCO) was set up in 1970 to provide affordable
housing and provide specialized attention to critical segments of infrastructure development in cities
and towns.
2.3. In the late 80’s and early 90’s, Government envisaged a larger role for the private sector in the
construction of housing, whereas government focused on mobilization of resources, provision for
subsidized housing for the poor and acquisition of land. The National Housing Bank (NHB) was set up
as a wholly owned subsidiary of Reserve Bank of India (RBI), in 1988 under the National Housing Bank
Act, 1987 to expand the base of housing finance. These were coupled with schemes aimed at provision
of housing and basic services for the urban poor.
2.4. The first National Housing Policy was announced in 1988 to eradicate houselessness and
improve the housing conditions. Thereafter a revised National Housing Policy was announced in 1994
as a by-product of economic reforms process initiated in 1991. The goal of this policy was to increase
the supply of land and basic minimum services with a view to promote a healthy environment.
Subsequently, a Housing and Habitat Policy was unveiled in 1998 with the vision of “shelter for all”
and better quality of life to all citizens by using the potential of public, private and household sectors.
The key objective of the policy was on creating strong Public–Private Partnership (PPP) for tackling
the housing problem.
2.5. The National Urban Housing and Habitat Policy (NUHHP) 2007 was formulated with the goal
of `Affordable Housing for All’ with special emphasis on vulnerable sections of society such as
Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes, Backward Classes, Minorities and the Urban Poor. The spotlight
was on ‘habitat development’ with a ‘Regional Planning Approach’ with the role of Government as a
‘facilitator’ and ‘regulator.’ The NUHHP-2007 lays emphasis on earmarking of land for EWS/LIG groups
in new housing projects while retaining Governments role in social housing so that affordable housing
is made available for EWS and LIG categories either on ownership or on rental basis.
3. Initiatives of Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation (MoHUPA):
3.1. The Central and State Governments incentivise the housing sector in order to ensure greater
home ownership. Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation (MoHUPA) has had various
programmes in the housing sector at different point of time namely Environmental Improvement of
Urban Slums (EIUS) Scheme, National Slum Development Programme (NSDP), Valmiki Ambedkar
Page 9 of 41

DRAFT
Awas Yojana (VAMBAY), Basic Service for Urban Poor (BSUP) and Integrated Housing & Slum
Development Program (IHSDP) under Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JnNURM),
Rajiv Awas Yojana (RAY), Interest Subsidy Scheme for Urban Poor (ISHUP)/Rajiv Rinn Yojana (RRY)
etc.
4. Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation (MoHUPA) had constituted a Task Force on Rental
Housing (TFRH)4 to suggest measures to give a fillip to rental housing . The task force had given
thirteen recommendations which have been considered in formulation of the National Urban Rental
Housing Policy, 2015.
5. Need for Rental Housing Policy:
5.1. As illustrated in the historical context of Housing Polices the focus of most of the policy/programmatic
interventions of Government are oriented towards home ownership which is unlikely to solve the
housing shortage in urban India keeping in view that majority of the urban housing shortage pertains to
EWS and LIG categories. Although provision of affordable housing has been a priority area for the
Government of India since independence, providing housing to all on ownership basis is difficult and or
may not be feasible. These poor households live in congested conditions indicating that housing is
unaffordable for a large section of population, be it ownership or rental. Even after interventions such
as subsidies for housing loans and tax concessions, this segment cannot afford to own a house due to
low disposable income, irregular income, ever increasing real estate prices etc. Further, affordability
gap created by filtering5 and lack of creditworthiness of the urban poor prevents access to housing
loan/finance. Banks are not very active in sanctioning small ticket-size loans and the reduction in the
Outstanding Housing loans to the low income segments reflects that the housing loans to weaker
sections is decreasing every year i.e. upto Rs. 2 lakh – from 2% to 1%, upto Rs. 5 lakh – from 14% to
9%, up to Rs.10 lakh from 34% to 26% during 2012-13 to 2013-14 (source: National Housing Bank).
As per National Sample Survey Organisation (NSSO), urban residents pay around 6.2% of their total
expenditure on house rent, which has increased three fold from 2004-05 to 2011-126. The Income Tax
Act provides exemption of tax deduction for House Rent Allowance (HRA) for an employee which is
4 Details available in the website: http://mhupa.gov.in/ under What’s New category
5 Filtering is a process in which people in higher incomes occupy houses meant for lower income groups as they are more
affordable even though slightly congested and in the process enhance the rates, mainly rents.
6 Key Indicators of Households Consumer Expenditure in India: NSSO 68th Round (July 2011-June 2012), Ministry of Statistics
and Programme Implementation, GoI.
Page 10 of 41

DRAFT
around 40% on the basic salary. It is estimated that, the urban poor might be paying monthly 30% of
their income as house rent without any incentives.
5.2. On one hand, there is huge housing shortage (urban) and on the other hand there are massive stocks
of vacant houses. As per census 2011 data, 11.09 million houses are vacant in urban areas. While
exact reasons for the vacant properties are hard to ascertain it is felt that low rental yield, fear of
repossession, lack of incentives etc. are the possible reasons. If these vacant houses are made
available for rental housing, then some, if not most of the urban housing shortage, could be
addressed. There is no specific strategy/policy to deliberate on issues related to rental housing which
is required for a systematic growth. The National Commission of Urbanisation has also highlighted the
need to take curative steps to prevent landlords from keeping their houses vacant7.
5.3. In the absence of affordable rental housing options, growing families are forced to live in overcrowded
houses which lead to slum like situations. Rental housing can provide an opportunity to the tenants as
well as enable a steady source of income to the owners that converts urban land into an investment.
5.4. Time is appropriate to supplement ownership housing by a strong, vibrant and sustainable inclusion of
Rental Housing market with different models to address diverse housing needs for various segments
of the population. The country needs to encourage rental housing as an additional option for housing
to all sections of the society, particularly to the EWS/LIG, migrants and vulnerable groups who may not
be able to afford a home even with various incentives for ownership housing. Apart from the
affordability standpoint, rental housing is desirable for a number of reasons.
5.5. As per Census 2011, over 27% of urban residents of the country are living on rent and most of them
are informal in nature. The NSSO report has highlighted that, 25% of the hired dwelling units are
informal and only 5% are formal8. As all the States in India are governed by their respective Rent
Control Acts (RCA) which is skewed towards tenant protection, a fixed rent with limited options to
increase rentals etc. has resulted in rental housing being economically unattractive and thereby
creating an informal market. A ceiling on rents further reduced the quality and quantity of housing.
These laws not only restrict supply but also drive away legitimate seekers of rental housing which
force tenants into unrecorded and informal arrangements.
7 Report of the National Commission on Urbanization, August 1988, Volume-V, Part IV
8 NSSO 65th Round Report on Housing Conditions and Amenities in India (2008-09)
Page 11 of 41

DRAFT
5.6. Migrants to urban areas form the single largest population segment that needs housing in the cities. A
number of migrants come for varying durations of stay whehter in search of employment or education.
In 2007-08, the National Sample Survey (NSS) measured the migration rate (the proportion of
migrants in the population) in urban areas at 35%. The Census of India data shows that 10.98 million
people significantly migrated internally from Rural to Urban, 9.01 million Urban to Urban and 5.33
million from Urban to Rural areas between 1961 to 1971. Further, these rates have increased to 21.74
million, 15.16 million and 6.58 million people respectively in 20019. Further, if not all, some urban
residents may already have a house or a piece of land in their respective place of domicile and may
not need (or be interested) in ownership housing in urban areas and would look for affordable rental
accommodation. The reasons for migration vary significantly; amongst male migrants it is 37.6% on
account of work/employment whereas for females it is 64.9% due to marriage. The proportion of males
moving with household is 25.1% and the proportion of females moving with household is 18.9%. Since
most of the male migration happens in the form of single individuals (rather than with family) they
prefer to stay in affordable rental accommodation that allows them to minimise housing cost. Hence,
addressing affordability issues of housing through promoting rental housing is necessary for inclusive
urban development. Rental housing may also contribute towards preventing future growth of slums by
providing affordable housing option to poor migrants. Rental housing provides options closer to the
place of work and has the potential to improve their productivity.
5.7. Renting of homes is treated as a “commercial” activity which increases property tax for individuals and
service taxes for institutional rental housing operators (i.e. Hostels/PGs/Dormitories etc.) wherein
electricity and utility rates are calculated at par with commercial properties, hence reducing the rental
yield. Higher outflow due to commercial treatment deters the growth of rental housing.
6. Issues and challenges:
6.1. Further, the rent control law indirectly discriminates against the small owners/ underprivileged
residents of urban India. Housing loan payments can be deducted from Income Tax, but not rent paid
specially by the poor and vulnerable section of the society. In most cities rental yields have not kept
pace with the increase in prices of real estate. Rental yields were at levels of 6% or so in Mumbai
9 Migration Tables D- Census, 2001
Page 12 of 41

DRAFT
during 2006, around 3.5% in 2009 and 1.5% in 201110. At current yields there is limited participation of
the investors in the rental housing market. According to ‘Savills World Research study11 despite
continued growth in Mumbai, it has moderately negative rental growth combined with very low net
yields (detail enclosed at Annexure-I). The main factors preventing investment in rental housing are
rent control laws; unrealistically low rental yields; poor maintenance of rental stocks; low quantity of
housing constructed for rental purposes; holding back unoccupied houses for fear of losing control
etc.12. RCA has resulted in substantial reduction in residential construction for rent and all new
residential developments are built invariably for sale13.
6.2. Rental housing has the potential to minimise the capital requirement on the part of government as well
as to promote inclusive growth. The “High Level Task Force on Affordable Housing for All, 2008” also
endorsed the need for rental housing and recommended fostering an environment that would make
rental housing for EWS and LIG categories of households; Public-Private Partnership (PPP) in the
production and management of rental housing; along with setting up of a regulator to track rents and
fix prices etc.
6.3. Further on account of urbanisation coupled with demographic shifts, existing housing shortage has
created a demand for massive investment in housing. This capital requirement can be fulfilled by
bringing public and private sector participation through appropriate policies, review/modification in the
existing rules/regulations to bring transparency and accountability in the system to enable public and
private investment. The growth of service sector, rising aspirations of young population, frequent
change of job and dynamic growth potential with flexible career opportunities will create greater
demand for rental housing which is likely to grow over the years especially in urban areas which are a
pool/hub of new and global opportunities. By adopting a systematic approach to housing by including
rental housing a balanced approach may be ensured that will support future growth. It is with this
background that the National Urban Rental Housing (NURHP) Policy has been formulated.
10 Report on Policy and Interventions to Spur Growth of Rental Housing in India, Task Force on Rental Housing, September,
2013
11 Insights, World Cities Review, H2, 2013, Yolande Barnes, Director of Savills World Research
12 The Report of the National Commission on Urbanisation, August 1988, Vol-I
13The Report of the National Commission on Urbanisation, August 1988, Interim Report, Jan 1987: State Housing Boards no
longer construct any rental housing i.e. during 70’s Madhya Pradesh Housing Board sold away thousands of rental units to
industrial workers as it could no longer afford to maintain them on the rent that prevailed, the perception of most house owners
that once the house is given on rent, it will never be available to the owner this advertisements stating that company lease are
preferred are a pointer to this because it was felt that a company might vacate a building, whereas an individual tenant never
would that’s why rental market has tended to be restricted and supply of rental housing extremely limited.
Page 13 of 41

DRAFT
7. National Urban Rental Housing Policy (NURHP), 2015
7.1. Vision
‘To create a vibrant, sustainable and inclusive rental housing market in India’.
7.2. Policy Objectives:
The broad objectives of the NURHP, 2015 are:
7.2.1. To create adequate rental housing stock by promoting Social Rental Housing (SRH) with direct or
indirect support from Government (State) with special focus on affordability of vulnerable groups
and urban poor.
7.2.1.1. To promote Shelter facilities for the most vulnerable groups within the homeless population such
as single women and their dependent minor children, aged, infirm, disabled, mentally challenged
etc.
7.2.1.2. To promote Social Rental Housing for urban poor (EWS and LIG as defined by Government of
India from time to time) as a viable alternative housing option.
7.2.1.3. To promote Need Based Rental Housing (short/mid/long term basis) for specific target groups
such as migrant labour, single women, single men, students (any other target group as defined by
the State) who have the ability to pay only up to a certain amount of monthly rent14.
7.2.2. To promote Market Driven Rental Housing (MDRH may or may not be eligible for direct benefits
from government):
7.2.2.1. To promote Private Rental Housing (PRH) as an interim measure towards aspirational home
buyers.
7.2.2.2. To enable Institutional Rental Housing (Hostels/PGs/dormitories) for working class with special
focus on low earning employees working with Government/PSUs/Corporate
houses/Industries/NGOs etc (any other category as defined by the State Government from time
to time).
7.2.3. To remove legal, financial and administrative barriers for facilitating access to tenure, land,
finance and technology.
7.2.4. To enable formalization/regularization of Rental Housing on pan India basis through adoption of
Model Tenancy Act, 2015 of Ministry of HUPA.
7.2.5. To facilitate fund flow from government and private sector through innovative financial
Instruments to incentivise rental housing.
7.2.6. To promoting Public-Private Partnership (PPP) to construct, manage, maintain and operate rental
housing stock (Cooperative societies, Neighbourhood Associations, Resident Welfare
Associations etc.).
14 As defined by Government of India from time to time, physical definition of minimum space or habitable area to be adopted as
per National Building Code (NBC)
Page 14 of 41

DRAFT
7.3. Target groups
7.3.1. Shelter for the Homeless: Shelter for the homeless, street children, destitute and other vulnerable
groups of the society will be covered under the Shelter for Homeless (SUH) scheme under the
National Urban Livelihoods Mission (NULM)15.
7.3.2. Social Rental Housing (SRH) for Urban Poor: Social rental housing which caters to the urban poor
needs to be devised based on international experiences (enclosed at Annexure-II & V- Models on
Rental Housing). Special thrust will be given on the following target groups:
 Below Poverty Line (BPL), Economically Weaker Section (EWS) and Low Income Group (LIG)
households.
 Tenant due to constraints (Annexure-VI Criteria that may be adopted in identification of target
groups for prioritization)
7.3.3. Need Based Rental Housing for various target groups i.e. migrant labour, working women,
working men, students, transgender, single women, widow or any other group as identified
by the States.
 Migrant labour: People who migrate temporally to different cities/towns in search of
employment/livelihood. Most of these segments are either industrial or construction labourers
dependent on rental accommodation.
 Students/working women/man: This segment usually stays for 6 months to 5 years preferably
at a single location. Mostly depend on hostels provided by educational institutes or private
hostel operators or individual owners providing paying guest accommodation.
 PSU/Government Housing: People employed by PSUs or Government Department (both
Central and State), but not provided with accommodation. Characterised as economically
better off as compared to other migrants, this segment depends on low cost rental housing
that exists in the open market and prefer ownership housing after retirement and can hence
be categorised as aspiring home buyers.
 States/UTs can come up with their own methodology for identification and prioritising the
target groups for rental housing interventions especially for the social and need based target
15 http://mhupa.gov.in/NULM_Mission/NULM_Mission.htm
Page 15 of 41

DRAFT
groups taking into consideration the SECC data along with possibility of linking with Unique
Identity (Annexure-VI: Criteria that may be adopted in identification of target groups for
prioritization).
7.3.4. Market Based Rental Housing: It is presumed that, the rental housing requirement of other
categories i.e. Middle and Higher Income Groups (such as employees of
Central/State/ULBs/PSUs/NGOs/Corporate houses/industries/private sector institutions) will be
catered to by the market forces keeping in view their affordability.
8. Demand and Supply side interventions
For creation of a vibrant, sustainable and inclusive rental housing market in India following action
points/interventions are proposed:
8.1. Interventions proposed for demand generation in the rental housing sector:
8.1.1. Identification of various target groups and assessment of their preferences/likely demands through
primary and secondary survey.
8.1.2. Government at all levels to act as an enabler and facilitator to promote rental housing through
policies and regulations.
8.1.3. Provide incentives (fiscal and non-fiscal) to the tenants i.e. tax exemptions, housing vouchers etc.
8.1.4. Encourage creation of institutional owners such as REITs, Corporate firms, Not-for-profit entities,
Municipal Housing Companies, PSUs etc.
8.2. Interventions proposed to increase supply in the rental housing sector:
8.2.1. Undertake regulatory reforms such as implementation of Model Tenancy Act, 2015.
8.2.2. Encourage Public Private Partnership (PPP), Special Purpose Vehicle (SPVs), Residential Rental
Management Companies (RRMCs) for creation of Social/Need Based rental Housing.
8.2.3. Design programme/schemes and earmark budgets/identify funding sources along with dovetailing
of CSR and other funds (Labour Cess funds) etc. for creation of Social/Need based Rental Housing
Scheme.
8.2.4. Earmarking certain percentage of dwelling units for Social/Need Based Rental Housing under
various Central/State level Housing Schemes.
Page 16 of 41

DRAFT
8.2.5. Mandatory registration of rental housing specially Social/Need Based Rental Housing.
8.2.6. Promote Information technology (IT) enabled platforms for access to rental housing stock such as
online portals/database for Social/Need based rental housing.
8.2.7. Provide incentives (fiscal and non-fiscal) to the owners i.e. tax exemptions both direct and indirect
by Central, State and ULBs, maintenance allowance etc.
8.2.8. Reduce transaction costs and informality through IT enabled platforms.
8.2.9. Prepare strategy/action plan for bringing vacant/locked properties into the rental housing stock.
In order to take forward the aforesaid interventions the role of various stakeholders is outlined below:
9. Role of Central Government:
Government of India (GoI) will support States/UTs in following aspects:
9.1. Act as a ‘facilitator’ and ‘enabler’ for promoting rental housing.
9.2. Advise/guide States/UTs to adopt and implement NURHP, 2015 and extend support in preparing
State specific Policy on Rental Housing.
9.3. Encourage States to repeal/amend their respective Rent Control Acts and adopt the Draft Model
Tenancy Act, 2015.
9.4. Facilitate income tax concessions for institutional owners that create mass rental housing especially
catering to the affordable SRH sector.
9.5. Encourage States to provide subsidies for low income tenants (e.g. Rental Housing Vouchers16) and
finance for private owners who provide low-income rental housing or for improvement of existing low
quality rental housing.
9.6. Develop economically viable rental housing models (such as Rent-to Own Scheme, Shared
Ownership Scheme, PPP Model, Rental Voucher Scheme, Rental Allowance Scheme etc.).
9.7. Extend fiscal and non-fiscal concessions for rental housing including that for PPP in rental housing.
16 Rental Housing Vouchers: Transfer a certain amount of subsidy to the urban poor for meeting their housing costs, vouchers
(equivalent of cash) provided to the urban poor, vouchers could be used by the urban poor to top up the rent they are paying
to move into a habitable space.
Page 17 of 41

DRAFT
9.8. Encouraging building of mass rental housing either for own employees or for other socially vulnerable
section of the society under Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR), by allowing 100% deduction of
the capital expenditure17 incurred.
9.9. Create a separate category of depreciation for Hostels and Dormitories.
9.10. Recognise and award best/innovative practices adopted by the States/private sector/implementing
agencies for their contributions on rental housing sector and disseminate related success stories.
9.11. Encourage Residential Real Estate Investment Trust (RREITs).
9.12. Facilitate adoption of the Model Tenancy Act, 2015.
9.13. Facilitate modification in the legal and regulatory mechanism namely in Lease/Rent Agreement,
Building Permissions etc.
9.14. Coordinate with other respective Ministries on issues related to rental housing sector i.e. Ministry of
Labour and Employment (MoL&E), Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD), Ministry of Finance
(MoF) etc.
10. Role of State Government:
10.1. ‘Housing’ being a State subject, it is the primary responsibility of State Governments to ensure
housing for all. Following important action are to be taken by the State/Urban Local Bodies
(ULBs)18 in this regard:
10.2. Develop State Rental Housing Policy in consultation with the respective Urban Local Bodies
(ULBs) based on local needs and demand assessment.
10.3. To undertake appropriate reforms and create conducive environment to make Social Rental
Housing viable.
10.4. Earmark/reserve certain percentage of newly build flats/units/FSI/land within large housing projects
at affordable rent especially for SRH (of a certain size and scale) in Master/statutory plans.
10.5. Create an online portal of database on rental housing stock, vacant houses/properties.
17 Capital expenditures (CAPEX) are expenditures altering the future of the business, incurred when a business spends money
either to buy fixed assets or to add to the value of an existing fixed asset with a useful life extending beyond the taxable year.
18 *Do’s and Don’ts for States while formulating State Policy/Schemes on rental housing (Annexure-III)
Page 18 of 41

DRAFT
10.6. Facilitate online system for mandatory registration, enquiry on rental housing at State/ULB level
such as availability of rental properties, price, location etc.
10.7. Provide incentives like exemption from stamp duty, registration charge etc to boost Social Rental
Housing19 (affordable rent as decided by the State) projects.
10.8. Advice Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) and other entities to treat SRH properties like hostels (including
private hostels) as residential properties for the purpose of calculating property tax, and towards
other chares like electricity/water charges etc.
10.9. Provide support to public and private agencies for effective planning and execution of social rental
housing programmes/schemes.
10.10. Exempt property tax for predefined period (say for 5 to 10 years) for Social Rental Housing
properties.
10.11. Ensure convergence of various housing and livelihood generation schemes/programmes at various
levels.
10.12. Develop strategy to deal with the vacant/locked properties in consultation with various stakeholders
and come up with options/alternatives.
10.13. Facilitate Rental Housing Projects especially Social Rental Housing Projects by creating Special
Purpose Vehicles (SPVs)/ offering loans on lower interest rates allocate certain percentage of fund
especially for Social Rental Housing / offer opportunity to buy back from private sector affordable
housing builders and to make it available on rent, rent to own.
10.14. Repeal/amend existing Rent Control Legislations and adopt the Draft Model Tenancy Act, 2015
(of MoHUPA) to create a conducive atmosphere towards enhancing investment opportunity in
rental housing sector. The Model Tenancy Act, 2015 suggests:
 Entering into contractual agreements balancing the rights and responsibilities of owners and
tenants.
 Introducing smooth online registration process and grievance redressal mechanism to
enable growth of rental housing.
19Affordable Rental Housing (defined above as flats less than 60 sq. mt) including Affordable Hostels and Dormitories (total
charges less than pre defined per month per bed at current prices) and Captive Employee Housing should get cost benefits so
as to improve Yields/Margins- Task Force on Rental Housing (TFRH), MoHUPA.
Page 19 of 41

DRAFT
 Provide for fast adjudication process for resolution of disputes through rent tribunals.
 Repossession of the premises by the owner through rent courts.
10.15. Adopt/amend/formulate appropriate legislations/rules for creation of institutions to operate,
maintain and management of rental housing stock, both social and market based.
10.16. Prepare customised strategy/action plan to address the issues of vacant/locked houses through a
time bound action plan.
10.17. To promote Residential Rental Management Companies (RRMC) to bring efficiency especially in
operation, maintenance and management of large scale rental housing projects/schemes.
10.18. To encourage formation of cooperative societies, municipal housing companies, neighbourhood
associations, not for profit entities or other entities that would create, operate, maintain and
manage rental housing stock..
10.19. To take initiative towards a gradual shift from existing rental market to formal vibrant rental housing
market by promoting voluntary registration drives through appropriate fiscal and non-fiscal
incentives at local level.
10.20. To encourage employers to offer Rental Housing / Rent-to-Own facilities to their employees (i.e.
specific grants / financial assistance, loans at lower interest rates etc).
10.21. To encourage corporate houses, charity organisations, RWAs, NGOs to initiate rental housing
projects targeting the urban poor.
10.22. Initiate programmes to create/support system that accelerate rental housing projects specialty
social/need based rental housing category.
10.23. Build capacity of various stakeholders in planning and implementation of housing projects/schemes
with special focus on Rental Housing.
10.24. Promote use of local technology/design based on the local know how and needs for housing in
general and rental housing in particular.
Page 20 of 41

DRAFT
11. Role of Urban Local Bodies (ULBs):
11.1. The Urban Local Bodies shall take pro-active lead role in drafting and implementing the State
policy on urban rental housing i.e. assessment of the present situation to analyse and prepare
strategies (short, mid and long term) with support of State Government and other stakeholders.
11.2. To identify target groups and total requirements for social/need based rental housing with the
support of State Government.
11.3. To prioritise interventions/strategies to construct, maintain, manage and operate rental housing
stocks addressing Social/Need based rental Housing.
11.4. To implement Central and State sector schemes/programmes, pertaining to Rental Housing at the
city level.
11.5. To reduce the informality by rationalizing transaction costs in rental housing and to simplify
registration process in a time bound manner.
11.6. To develop/adopt fast track dispute resolution mechanisms through a systematic and exclusive
online portal on rental housing.
11.7. To developing innovative Public Private Partnership (PPP) projects for creation of rental housing
stock based on the local dynamics.
11.8. Treat rental housing stocks at par with owner occupied premises in terms of property tax treatment
and calculating other utility charges (water/electricity etc).
11.9. Make a separate budgetary provision for rental housing projects/schemes.
11.10. Create innovative models on rental housing to supplement/compliment Central/State
policies/programmes.
11.11. To constitute Municipal Housing Companies to create social/need based rental housing stocks and
undertakes construction of affordable rental housing to promote socially diverse neighbourhoods.
11.12. Allocate land for social and need based rental housing projects.
Page 21 of 41

DRAFT
12. Role of other institutions/entities
12.1. Banks and Housing Finance Institutions (HFIs) may promote innovative financial instruments to
finance Social Rental Housing Schemes.
12.2. Corporate/Private Sector may take up staff housing and undertake Social/Need Based Rental
Housing as part of Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR).
12.3. Co- operative Housing Sector and Non-Government Organizations’ (NGO) may encourage rental
housing societies and housing federations to actively participate in promoting rental housing and
provide information to tenants and encourage development of tenant associations by active
participation of NGO’s.
12.4. State Public Agencies like Housing Boards/Development Authorities may create appropriate SRH.
13. Way forward:
Access to housing has emerged as one of the most daunting challenges of the 21st Century in
many countries including India. Due to lack of focused policy intervention towards rental housing,
low yields, informality and poor quality of spaces, rental housing has been often confined to
margins.
Past interventions by the State Governments towards providing rental housing to its employees or
to the poor/migrants has not been successful owing to lack of mechanisms for operations and
maintenance and lack of funding to sustain these interventions. Therefore the formal rental sector
deserves greater attention and expertise, as properly developed rental markets can play a
formidable role in promoting affordable and decent quality housing especially for the socially and
economically weaker sections of the society. Compared to developed countries where large scale
institutional rental housing developers play a vital role, India still has a long way to go in creating
the rental space and mainstream rental housing as a part of formal Housing market and an
alternative to ownership housing.
The Draft NURHP, 2015 is a stepping stone towards realizing the vision to create a vibrant,
sustainable and inclusive rental housing market in India. Government of India along with State
Governments may develop various models on rental housing and start earmarking budgets to
mainstream rental housing in India. As the respective housing markets are different, States/UTs will
have to come up with their own rental housing policy along with schemes with different models on
Page 22 of 41

DRAFT
rental housing (i.e. rent to own, shared ownership, model on management of rental properties with
private partners in raising necessary funds, resources etc.) especially towards providing
Social/Need Based Rental Housing. The states should also necessarily come up with criteria of
identification of target tenants for whom it would like to provide rental housing and support.
***************
Page 23 of 41

DRAFT
Annexure: I - Rental yield across various countries
Source: Insights World Cities Review, H2, 2013, Savills
Page 24 of 41

DRAFT
Annexure: II - Case studies on Rental Housing from across the World
1. United States of America:
1.1. Housing Choice Vouchers:
Housing Choice Vouchers programme allowing tenants to seek their own housing from private landlords,
rather than confining low-income tenants to public housing ghettos.
United States of America, in the early 1970 started Section 8 Housing Choice Voucher program (originally
called certificates) aimed at low-income rental housing as part of their federal housing policy. It supplements
rent payments for approximately 2.2 million low-income families and individuals. Recipients choose a house
or apartment available in the private market and contribute roughly 30% of their incomes toward rent, with the
program paying the difference up to a locally defined “payment standard.” When families first receive a
voucher, they are responsible for finding a house or apartment that meets the program’s housing quality
standards with a landlord who is willing to participate in the program. Some recipients are able to remain in
their original housing unit by convincing the landlord to accept subsidy payments from the Section 8 program.
Once they find a qualified housing unit, families or individuals can begin receiving housing assistance.
Similar income vouchers for lower income groups are also being administered in South Korea
The housing choice voucher program is the federal government's major program for assisting very low-
income families, the elderly, and the disabled to afford decent, safe, and sanitary housing in the private
market. Since housing assistance is provided on behalf of the family or individual, participants are able to find
their own housing, including single-family homes, townhouses and apartments. The participant is free to
choose any housing that meets the requirements of the program and is not limited to units located in
subsidized housing projects.
Housing choice vouchers are administered locally by public housing agencies (PHAs). The PHAs receive
federal funds from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) to administer the
voucher program. A family that is issued a housing voucher is responsible for finding a suitable housing unit
of the family's choice where the owner agrees to rent under the program. This unit may include the family's
present residence. Rental units must meet minimum standards of health and safety, as determined by the
PHA.
A housing subsidy is paid to the landlord directly by the PHA on behalf of the participating family. The family
then pays the difference between the actual rent charged by the landlord and the amount subsidized by the
program. Under certain circumstances, if authorized by the PHA, a family may use its voucher to purchase a
modest home.
1.2. Low Income Tax credit (LIHTC)
In US, Low-Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) is the nation’s largest and most successful affordable rental
housing production programme. LIHTC Program is an indirect Federal subsidy used to finance the
development of affordable rental housing for low-income households. Having financed more than 2 million
homes since 1987 and more than 1,20,000 annually in recent years. Approximately,90% of all affordable
rental housing is financed through LIHTC.
For further details following links may be seen:
http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/program_offices/public_indian_housing/programs/hcv/about/fact_sheet
http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/program_offices/public_indian_housing/programs/hcv/about
http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD
http://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/ahs.html
http://www.usa.gov/Citizen/Topics/Family-Homes.shtml
Page 25 of 41

DRAFT
2. Australia:
2.1. Affordable Housing:
Australians for Affordable Housing is a coalition of over 60 national housing, welfare and community sector
organisations. The coalition will highlight the problem of housing affordability and call on all levels of government
to make the changes necessary to ensure all Australians can find an affordable home. Governments at all levels
influence the housing market through tax incentives, first home owners grants, affordable housing programs,
planning controls and rent assistance.
As government housing policy is to ensure that all Australian households can access affordable housing and that
government action needs to be coordinated to deliver that goal. To do this a clear national plan to deliver
affordable housing to all Australians that include:
 Investment in more low cost rental housing;
 More opportunities for low income households to get into home ownership;
 Better financial assistance for low income renters;
 Initiatives to make home ownership more achievable for first home buyers;
 Changing the housing investment tax arrangements that drive up house prices; and
 A single cabinet level housing minister who is responsible for delivering these changes.
2.2. National Rental Affordable Scheme:
 The Government has launched National Rental Affordability scheme (NRAS) to help increase the supply
of affordable rental dwellings by up to 50,000 by 2012, with a further 50,000 to be made available post
July 2012 subject to demand.
 Rent for these properties will be charged at 20% below the market rate for eligible tenant.
 Australian Government will provide funding to increase the supply of affordable rental dwellings; reduce
rental costs for low to moderate income households; and encourage large scale investment and
innovative delivery of affordable housing.
 This scheme offers annual incentives for a period of 10 years and the two key elements of the scheme
are :
 A Commonwealth Government incentive of $6000 per dwelling per year refundable tax offset or
payment; and
 A State or Territory Government incentive of $2000 per dwelling per year in direct or in kind financial
support.
Page 26 of 41

DRAFT
2.3. Eligibility criteria:
 Must be an Australian citizen, have permanent residency or have been issued with a temporary
protection or bridging visa
 Must be a Queensland resident or provide evidence of a definite need to move to Queensland.
 Household members must not own or part-own property within Australia or overseas. This includes
residential or commercial property, land, mobile home or caravan (permanently connected to
utilities)
 Household’s combined liquid assets, meaning money in the bank, shares, investments and
superannuation pay-outs, must not exceed $84,812.50 for a single person or $105,375.00 for two
or more household members
2.4. Important points:
 Household income cannot exceed initial income limit at the point of application.
 Tenants whose income exceeds the relevant upper income limit for their household type for two
consecutive eligibility years cease to be eligible tenants.
 Income eligibility limits for the National Rental Affordability Scheme are higher than those for social
housing.
 Income levels above are assessed on the total income for a household, not individuals within the
household.
 Yearly rent increases for scheme properties are capped at the rental component of the Consumer
Price Index (CPI).
 Tenants renting a property through the Scheme may be eligible for rent assistance, subject to the
normal Centre link eligibility criteria.
 The appointed tenancy managers of Scheme properties will select which eligible applicants will be
housed through the Scheme.
 The department has no involvement in the management of these tenancies.
For further details following links may be seen:
http://www.housing.wa.gov.au/housingoptions/rentaloptions/nras/Pages/default.aspx
https://www.dss.gov.au/our-responsibilities/housing-support/programmes-services/national-rental-affordability-scheme
https://www.sa.gov.au/topics/housing-property-and-land/housing/renting-and-letting/national-rental-affordability-
scheme-nras
http://www.hpw.qld.gov.au/Housing/PartnershipInitiatives/NationalRentalAffordabilityScheme/Pages/default.aspx
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/National_Rental_Affordability_Scheme
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public_housing_in_Australia
http://www.dhw.wa.gov.au/HousingDocuments/Rental_Policy_Manual.pdf
https://life.curtin.edu.au/local/docs/UL_AS_G_RentingHomeWA.pdf
Page 27 of 41

DRAFT
3. Ireland:
The Republic of Ireland in particular has large-scale of immigration, with 4,20,000 foreign nationals as of 2006,
about 10% of the population. A quarter of births (24%) in 2009 were to mothers born outside of Ireland.
Chinese and Nigerians, along with people from other African countries, have accounted for a large proportion
of the non–European Union migrants to Ireland.
3.1. Rental Housing Scheme:
This scheme enables the purchase of a new or a second-hand home on the open market with the local
authority or the not-for-profit housing agency initially taking at least 40% stake, which they rent to the
beneficiaries. The individual funds their equity stake through a local authority loan and committed to take out
all the equity in the property over 25 years. They make payments on a mortgage for the part they own and pay
rent to the local authority for the other part. Irish housing policy also aims to enhance the role of private rental
sector by reforming tenancy legislation.
Interest on borrowings for the purchase, improvement or repair of any rented residential property can be offset
against rental income and tax relief can be claimed on capital expenditure on refurbishment of rented
residential accommodation after April 2001. The stamp duty for letting houses has been abolished.
Social security recipients may be entitled to receive a supplementary welfare allowance, a rent supplement to
cover the substantial part of the average market rent in their local area.
Under Rental Accommodation Scheme introduced in 2004, local authority will progressively take over
responsibility for procuring new rental accommodation on a long term basis for approximately 30,000 house
rent supplement recipients transferred to them. The scheme is run by local authorities and makes the final
decision regarding who is eligible under the scheme. In general, people who are getting Rent Supplement for
more than 18 months are considered for RAS.
Under the scheme local authorities draw up contracts with landlords to provide housing for an agreed term for
people with a long-term housing need. The local authority pays the rent directly to the landlord. Tenant to pay
continue rent to the respective local authority, not to landlord.
The key elements of the scheme are:
• Local authorities pay the full rent to the landlord on behalf of the tenant.
• Landlords must register tenancies with the Private Residential Tenancies Board (PRTB) and the tenancies
are governed by the Residential Tenancies Act 2004.
• The property must meet minimum standards for private rental accommodation.
• Deposits are not required since the local authority has entered into a contract with the landlord.
For further details following links may be seen:
http://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/owning_a_home/help_with_buying_a_home/shared_ownership.html
http://www.ucd.ie/geary/static/publications/workingpapers/gearywp201306.pdf
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ESB_Group
http://www.habitatireland.ie/2015/01/importance-housing/?gclid=CK2T8omh88UCFREsjgodTXUAJw
http://ireland.angloinfo.com/housing/renting-accommodation/
http://www.citizensinformation.ie/en/housing/local_authority_and_social_housing/rental_accommodation_scheme.html
Page 28 of 41

DRAFT
4. China:
The government of China has promoted the commercialization of housing in urban areas since 1978.
Property development has become big business in China, with new cities and suburbs springing up with new
apartments and house prices have rocketed in recent times.
4.1. Rental housing:
The Chinese government provides old flats on rental at a very low price and called 'Lian Zu Fang' (literally
'low-rent house' or 'low-rent housing’). It has another popular scheme called the “Public Rental Housing”
(PRH) scheme which is the first attempt to use non-ownership housing to solve the housing problem of
people, mainly focusing on relieving the accommodation stress of local young staff and migrant workers who
have relatively low income.
China has introduced a series of tax exemptions for companies responsible for building and managing public
rental-housing projects, on state. Low-income rental housing is led by government, using rent subsidies and
direct providing low-rent housing. Rental housing subsidies mean that the government will provide different
rent subsidies to eligible family based on rent standards. Fund mobilisation for rental housing done through
following measured:
 A special fund has been created in the governmental fiscal budget for rental housing;
 Creation of a low-rent housing guarantee fund;
 After the complete construction of public rental housing project, the management cost, maintenance
fee and capital cost are paid by rent.
 Country is also exploring new ways like Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs) to expand the
financing channel for public rental housing.
 There are also private funds that raise funds exclusively for public rental housing
 Incentives for developers and investors to participate in PRH construction
Since the price difference between public rental housing and commercial housing, the local government is
bound to provide a series of preferential policies to attract more companies to join.
4.2. Some of the incentives are:
 The developers negotiate with the authority about land price in case they are building rental housing;
 The government does not levy any tax on urban land use for land developed for public rental
housing. It does not levy stamp duty for the construction of such projects, and waives both taxes and
stamp duties in cases where a property-management firm buys apartments for use as public rental
housing.
 Exemptions are also offered on deed tax and property tax
 There are some beneficial rules for public rental housing, such as 50%-70% discounts for land
transfer fee, and 1.5 to 2 times of residential floor area ratio compared with commercial housing.
For further details following links may be seen:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Housing_in_China
http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/bizchina/07house.html
http://www.chinalawandpractice.com/Article/2660697/Channel/7576/Public-Rental-Housing-Scheme-brings-
opportunities.html
http://www.diva-portal.org/smash/get/diva2:437080/FULLTEXT01.pdf
http://www.lincolninst.edu/pubs/1871_Affordable-Housing-in-China
Page 29 of 41

DRAFT
5. United Kingdom:
Ministry was set up to coordinate a mass council housing program to overcome a huge housing shortfall.
However, as the housing markets have matured over the last 50 years, there has been a Government policy
aimed to increase social rented housing in favour of home ownership and to increasing withdrawal of state
capital subsidies. This has resulted in a significant decline in the affordable rented sector. The private rented
sector has started playing an increasingly important role in satisfying housing need, supported by revenue
benefit funding from the Government.
Additionally, Housing Associations, which are more than 1,500 in the UK, have also begun to promote ‘rent to
buy’ schemes, in which aspiring buyers can let/rent an affordable new-build home for up to five years, while
they amass a deposit to secure a loan to buy the same. These government-backed schemes offer discounted
rent of no more than 80% of what tenants would pay on the open market and often less and some tenants
even return some of the rent for use as part of the deposit when they graduate to ownership. In most cases,
the buyer in such schemes can expect to be allowed to buy on a shared ownership basis, purchasing only as
much of the property as they can afford, and continuing to rent the remaining portion.
5.1. Major initiatives:
 Allowing local flexibility on waiting lists, types of tenancies and social tenants’ and landlords’ rights
and responsibilities.
 Helping social landlords stop tenancy fraud and anti-social behavior.
 Providing more affordable housing, including through a new model of affordable rent that allows
registered housing providers to charge no more than 80% of local market rent.
 Changing the housing revenue account subsidy system to a new, fair, locally controlled system where
local authorities are responsible and accountable for their housing services.
 Funding local authorities to refurbish their housing stock.
 Supporting tenants to play a bigger role in managing their accommodation through the tenant
empowerment programme.
 Encouraging more investment in the private rented sector through schemes like new loan guarantees
and the Build to Rent Fund.
For further details following links may be seen:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Affordability_of_housing_in_the_United_Kingdom
http://www.housing.org.uk/
http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/dcp171766_373513.pdf
http://www.jrf.org.uk/sites/files/jrf/migrants-private-rental-sector-full.pdf
https://www.gov.uk/government/topics/housing
http://www.jrf.org.uk/sites/files/jrf/1859353622.pdf
https://www.lse.ac.uk/geographyAndEnvironment/research/london/events/HEIF/HEIF4b_10-11%20
newlondonenv/prslaunch/Book.pdf
Page 30 of 41

DRAFT
6. Canada :
6.1. Canada Rental Supply Program (CRSP):
CRSP was introduced in 1981 with the objective of stimulating private rental investment in cities with tight
rental vacancy rates. It targeted the production of 30,000 new rental dwellings over three years (1982–
1984). The result of the program was actual production of roughly 24,000 rental units over the three years
(CMHC, 1988). The mechanism used was an interest-free loan that was designed to reduce the
amount of investor equity required for the development to be viable. The maximum assistance was
calculated at the difference between 80% of cost and the level of mortgage financing the project could carry
at market rents, after allowing for approved operating expenses and a fair return on equity to the investor.
The maximum amount of the loan was $7,500 per unit. The loan was secured as a second mortgage on
title and no payments of either principal or interest were required for 15 years. After 15 years, the
property owner had the option of repaying the original capital amount as a lump sum or amortizing the
amount with ongoing interest payments at the then prevailing government direct lending rate. There was no
restriction on rent, but owners were obligated to offer 33% of the units to provinces for rent supplement
tenants (a separate contract to provide a subsidy lowering net rent to eligible low income tenants. As such,
the primary objective was to stimulate supply/construction of rental units.
6.2. Rental assistance (to separately address affordability issues):
Rent Supplements Rent supplements have been used in Canada as a contractual arrangement with
landlords to be allocated certain units to eligible low-income households. The contract specified the
market rent and rate at which this rent can be annually increased (usually an inflation linked rent index).
Households pay partial rent based on 30% of income, with the program then paying the difference between
this 30% RGI payment and the market rent. These supplementary payments are made directly to the
landlord.
Housing Allowances unlike a rent supplement, a housing allowance does not involve directly contracting
with a landlord. It leaves recipients to freely choose where they live and to select their own unit. It is
possible to have minimal condition or size standards in order to ensure the program is not supporting poor
quality housing. The subsidy payment similarly uses a percentage of income, such as 30% but adds a
further formulaic element, a “percentage of gap” between the 30% level and actual market rent. So if the
market rent is $500 and 30% of income is $375, the gap is $125. The percentage of gap covers a specified
percent of this gap such as 6% (so $75) or 75% ($93.75). The percent of rent in programs in British
Colombia and Manitoba varies, starting at 90% for the lowest-income recipients declining linearly to 60 % in
Manitoba). This approach requires the recipient to pay part of the gap and thus induces an element of
consumer control so that the recipient that is paying part of the cost has incentive to select a lower cost
unit. The cost is also managed by imposing a maximum rent for eligible assistance.
Page 31 of 41

DRAFT
6.3. Non-profit Housing Program (1978–1985):
The objective was twofold: to generate supply of rental units and to ensure they are made available at rents
affordable to low-moderate income individuals and families. Eligible developers were non profit corporations
and cooperatives, in which the distribution of net operating surplus for personal gain was prohibited. Thus
these corporations have no incentive to generate profit and instead tend to minimize any increase in rent
levels to an amount necessary to cover break-even costs. Project sponsors/developers were eligible to
obtain insured mortgage loans covering 100% of capital cost. The resulting operating expenses, plus
debt servicing expenses, were well above the level that could be covered by low affordable rents.
Accordingly, an ongoing operating subsidy was provided (with 35-year duration, matching the amortization
period of the mortgage). During the 1978–1985, form of the operating subsidy was finite, calculated as the
difference between the amortizing mortgage payment calculated at the prevailing mortgage rate and the
amount calculated at 2%. The non-profit owner would then charge rents sufficient to cover an effective
mortgage payment at 2% plus operating expenses. A minimum 15% of units were required to be provided at
rents set at 25% of tenants gross income (this was raised to 30% in 1991), although in practice most non-
profit owners significantly exceed the minimum proportion of rent geared to income basis (RGI) units
(averaging around 40% of all units). The remaining units were rented at a “low end of market (LEM) rent,
typically about 95% of market rate, so that there was a mix of low and moderate income (avoiding issues of
concentrated poverty and stigmatization of rental properties).
For further details:
Source: Development of the Rental Housing Market in Latin America and the Caribbean by Steve Pomeroy
Marc Godbout, Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) paper, No. IDB-DP-173, February 2011.
Page 32 of 41

DRAFT
7. Germany:
Germany was one of the best examples of European social housing both quantitatively and qualitatively.
However, the significance of social housing as a mechanism of urban policy has weakened like in other EU
countries (e.g. The Netherlands) in last couple of decades. There has been a shift from direct supply of
houses under ownership to assistance to the families for payment of rents of the houses which has resulted
in the creation of vast rental market from private owners. All the three tires Federal, State and local bodies
have defined accountability for housing policy i.e. Federal Government sets the legal framework (tenancy
law, housing benefits, social assistance). The States (16) participate in the legislation, promote social
housing (finance the programs) and Municipalities (ULBs) plan city and land use, provide the local
infrastructure of housing and care for people in need of help on the housing market, develop own social
housing programmes. Federal governments and States intervene in case of ULBs are unable to meet the
demand.
Housing policy in Germany has progressively shifted the focus from the supply of houses to support for
individual families. Housing Policy is based upon few policy mechanisms or instruments the provisions of
existing tenancy law are more regulatory in character and have strong protective meaning for the tenants and
opposite for the house owners. Tenants are protected against eviction; rent increases are capped; and the
landlord is under duty to maintain dwelling. The landlords are free to choose their tenants, pass on costs of
refurbishment to the tenant and are entitled to cancel contract in case of serious violations of tenant’s duties.
Housing benefits for those who are unable to get government sponsored dwelling for themselves and have a
rental accommodation in the free housing market wherein direct subsidy to the individuals who satisfy a list of
criteria laid down by the law. Beneficiaries of this assistance must be tenants, to afford satisfactory dwelling
space. Although this policy instrument is regulated by a federal law, payments to beneficiaries are shared by
both the federal and state governments in equal ratio. On the other hand home ownership subsidy was on e
of the biggest and long lasting subsidy programmes in Germany which was effective during 1949-2006. It
provided subsidy to the ‘first buyers’ to encourage ownership available to individuals through tax deductions.
Since 1996, this has been modified and paid only to individuals with less than a certain limit. Social Housing
Policy aimed to eliminate housing shortage, funds up to 80% of cost of site and construction within a
stipulated framework. Beneficiaries identified through municipalities, are supposed to obey restrictions on
resale or renting out for a predetermined (medium to long term) period. The houses thus created are a form
of cooperative housing.
Social housing law, aimed to eliminate housing shortage, used to fund up to 80% of cost of site and
construction within a stipulated frame work. Social is only a limited part of the housing stock. Only 9% of
housing units in the West Berlin and 24% in the East Berlin were classified as ‘social or quasi-social’ housing
in 2006. The rise of rents makes it impossible for the low-income to afford. In the last decade, stock of social
housing has reduced in size because of privatization of such stocks by ULBs facing fiscal difficulties. It has
been estimated that tens of thousands of such public housing units were sold to global institutional investors,
predominantly US, British or Japanese pension funds.
This has reflected by the fact that out of 39 million dwellings 60% of the housing stocks are rented premises
(1 out of 5 households with rented accommodation receives financial assistance for housing) (Source:
Christiane Drosteet al., Social Housing in Germany, LSE London, 2007). 40% of all households consist of 1
person only.
Six Municipal Housing Companies (owned around 17% of the total housing stock of Berlin around
2,84,000 DUs) were constituted with the following functions:
 Provide affordable , quality housing
 Moderating effect of low rents on the whole housing market
 Promotion of socially diverse neighborhoods
For further details:
Source: Study Report, SNPUPR study Programme to Germany-United Kingdom 2014-15, MoHUPA.
Page 33 of 41

DRAFT
8. Finland (North Europe):
Rental Management Company, SATO:
SATO is a leading Finnish housing investment company. We contribute to growth and evolution in society
through our provision of housing
SATO is one of Finland’s leading corporate investors in housing. It owns a total of about 23,500 rentable
homes in Finland’s largest centres of urban growth and St. Petersburg. Their investment assets have a
fair value of roughly 2.1 billion Euros.
SATO’s investment in housing business includes both privately financed and state-subsidised housing
property, of which the latter is affected by restrictions set by housing legislation both at the company level
and for individual properties and enjoys state subsidy and interest subsidised credit. This segmentation
enhances the transparency of operations and reporting related to the state-subsidised housing stock.
SATO actively buys and sells properties and develops property for Rental purposes. Its yield is around
6.2% on the fair value of its properties. Using a combination of Rental Income and Income from Asset
Disposal, SATO has been able to give a healthy 12% return to its Shareholders. SATO’s biggest
shareholders are Finnish pension insurers and other insurance companies.
REIT Schemes:
 Be a Public Listed Company for Rental Housing.
 Have a minimum equity of 5M€ distributed over 5 separate investors.
 Minimum holding period: 5 years.
 At least 80% of its assets have to be invested in residential real-estate.
 At least 80% of the REIT's gross revenues must come from residential rental income.
 At least 90% of the REIT's taxable income, excluding unrealised capital gains, to be distributed to
shareholders through dividends.
 Corporation is income-tax-exempt, but the shareholders will have to pay individual income tax on
the dividends.
 Largest individual shareholder may own less than 10% of company shares.
For further details following links may be seen:
http://www.sato.fi/en/housing-solutions/sato-renthome-star-rated-rental-homes
Page 34 of 41

DRAFT
Annexure: III - Do’s and Don’ts for States
Sl. No. Do’s Don’t
1. Recognise that many urban households live Ignore non-owners and assume that they all wish to
in rental and shared housing become homeowners now
2. Consider renting to be one of the various Neglect rental option and focus only on home
ways to improve housing condition ownership
3. Estimate number of rental households and Attack landowners as a class; large numbers are
landlords just poor as their tenants
4. Evaluate whether regulatory frameworks for Assume that poor households benefit from rent
rental housing are functioning properly and controls; poor landlords most certainly do not, nor
producing desirable results do tenants and potential tenants who are not
covered by those controls
5. Count the tenant families that live in Demolish or close down poor quality rental
settlements before beginning a settlement accommodation unless it is dangerous to the
upgrading project and recognise their special inhabitants
needs
6. Produce simple rental contracts templates Assume that long contracts are desirable for every
that can be brought in local stores kind of tenant
7. Set up a cheap arbitration and conciliation Assume that the court system provides adequate
service for landlords and tenants that works protection for either poor tenants or poor landlords
quickly
8. Provide credit facilities or subsidies for poor Subsidise only new home buyers
landlords who wish to extend or improve their
accommodation
9. Upgrade the rental properties based on Not consider or recognise the need of existing
recognising the special needs of the tenant tenants families in the settlement.
families that live in the settlement
10. Facilitate online registration of rental Restricted to lengthy manual registration of rental
properties, property dealers working in properties, property dealers, and grievance
informal sector, grievance redressal system redressal process
11. Adopting the Model Tenancy Act, 2015 Continue with the existing Rent Control Act
12. Incentivise poor owners and tenants through Provide incentives/tax rebates only to the home
subsidies and tax incentives/rental vouchers owners
etc.
13. Treat rental housing properties at par with Not having any consideration or incentives on rental
residential rates while imposing property tax, housing, treat them at par with commercial
water and electricity charges. properties like hotels
14. Develop simple rental agreement templates Have no focus on formal agreements or without
which can be brought in local market or ULBs standardisation, most of the rental agreements
with a minimum fees were based on informal agreements
Page 35 of 41

DRAFT
15. Most essential items to be included in rental Have non-standard rental agreements
agreement are:
 Definition and description of the rental
unit
 Duration / timelines of contracts
 Rent setting and rent increases
 Procedure for resolving conflicts and
stability
 Procedure for termination of contracts
16. Prepare inventory of vacant and locked Have no strategy or system on vacant and locked
properties and strategy to deal with the same properties
17. Create systems that encourage rental Have non-standards or safety measures
properties that are safe and habitable
18. Ensure commitments to provide affordable Do not commit to provide affordable rental housing
rental.
19. States could consider providing temporary Do not have any incentives or tax exemptions for
tax exemptions to shift properties currently in property improvement
the informal sector to the formal sector and
provide incentives for property improvement
20. Work out deductibility of main costs such as No deduction for maintenance charges or interest
maintenance work and interest paid, set paid, depreciation etc.
standard for economic depreciation of rental
properties based on the existing condition
21. Explore possibilities of strengthening of No innovation in insurance for rental housing
insurance markets for both owners and
tenants through rental income guarantee or
insurance scheme where proportion of rental
income is paid in the event of non-payment
by the tenant; however govt must be careful
that the entire burden does not fall on it, and
strict and transparent insurance standards to
be set to avoid moral hazards.
22. Grants, land or infrastructure provided at Do not have any provision to provide grants, lands
reduced cost in exchange for keeping rents or infrastructure facilities for rental housing
affordable for EWS/LIG and other vulnerable
groups as notified by the Government from
time to time.
23. Establish Property Management Property Management Institute/company only for
Institutes/company for large scale owners, commercial properties
encourage those already in commercial
property management to start residential
arms, offer training to small scale or
individual owners which will increase
investment opportunities
Source: Sl. number 1 to 8: A Policy Guide to Rental Housing in Developing Countries Quick Policy Guide-Volume 1, by Alan
Gilbert, UNHABITAT.
Page 36 of 41

DRAFT
Annexure: IV - Percentage of Rental Housing in Developed Countries
Percentage of total housing stock* Percentage of social housing stock by**
Country Social rental Private rental Pure public Housing assoc (Limited profit/non-
sector profit)
UK 20 10 54 46
Ireland 7 11 90 10
USA 3 29 31 69^
Australia 5 22 85 8
Canada 6 28 34 66
Austria 23 17 43 53
France 16 24 Some^ 90^
The 35 12 1 99
Netherlands
Denmark 19 18 - 100
Germany 6 51 18 Some^
Switzerland 6 59 Some^ Some^
Singapore <10 - 100 -
Republic of 9 35 Some -
Korea
Hong Kong 31 - 100 -
Note: Housing associations are for profit, non-profit or limited profit organisations that build and/or manage
low-cost or ‘social’ housing
*Reminder of total housing stock is predominantly ownership
**The social housing stock includes both social rental and ownership units
^Include some for profit associations, co-operatives, modern rent agencies and regulated private landlords,
Some associations have tenant shareholders.
Source: International experience in providing affordable housing, IDFC 2011
Page 37 of 41

DRAFT
Annexure: V – Models on Rental Housing
1. Rental housing for the prospective migrants/homeless:
Slums are created when large number of migrants arrive in the city with limited resources and are unable to
afford decent accommodation. There is a need to create sufficient number of rental accommodation which
can be made available to the target groups i.e. migrants, homeless and destitute etc. (i) for families and (ii)
for single person dormitory. State government along with the Urban Local Bodies may construct rental
houses up to various sizes for families and single room hostels/dormitories in sufficient numbers which can
be let out by the Urban Local Bodies or other agencies including private sector to people who cannot afford
to buy a house initially.
Such houses can be given on rent up to a certain time on a short to long term basis, thereafter occupants
(other than tenants such as homeless, destitute, people with special needs, aged etc.) are expected to
move to their own houses. The ULBs shall manage the rental housing stocks, including identification of
tenants, rent fixation, ensuring reuse of the stock. Corporate houses under their Corporate Social
Responsibility (CSR) activities may also be allowed to fund these rental housing.
2. Rent to own scheme:
Rent to own housing model typically involves the initial allotment of the unit on a leased basis for a fixed
number of years. The buyer deposits the monthly rent (equivalent to Equated Monthly Installment) in bank
account. The EMI contains a certain percentage of rent and rest as thrift. When EMI amount reaches
certain percentage (i.e.10%) of total unit price, property will be registered on buyer’s name and
hypothecated to bank and government.
In case of non-payment of EMI, bank and government will resell property. Thrift amount will be returned to
buyer without interest. Resale powers lie with bank and government till the completion of tenure. Once
100% payment is done, property papers are handed over to the buyer by de-hypothecation.
3. Converting Slums on ULB Land to Rental Housing20:
Between 9 and 141 million households live in about 33,500 slums in India (Census of India, 2011; MoSPI,
2013). One of the biggest challenges that slum households face is the security of their tenure. If a slum
household does not have the legal right to stay on the land it is occupying, it is liable for eviction—a
phenomenon not so uncommon in large cities and metropolises. Insecurity of tenure also discourages
households from investing in health, education and other development actions, as any such investment is
at risk of being lost in the event of displacement or forceful eviction. Nearly 60% of slums across urban
India are on government owned lands, in which 40% are on lands that belong to Urban Local Bodies
(ULBs) – municipalities, municipal corporations, town panchayats, municipal councils, etc. In some states
such as Karnataka, almost 65% of slums are on lands owned by locally elected urban governments
(MoSPI, 2010).
20 Making Rental Housing Work: A Case for Slum Households and ULBs, Swastik Harish – Senior Consultant, Indian Institute for
Human Settlements- June 2015
Page 38 of 41

DRAFT
The feasibility of large scale housing intervention in urban areas can be enhanced by rental housing
mechanisms that can address access to land, questions of tenure as well as operations and maintenance
of housing assets. Rental housing is also associated with higher workforce participation, since it enhances
labour mobility through the provision of diverse housing options for low income households at various life
stages. There is a positive co-relation between rental housing and work force participation as more rental
housing is associated with higher workforce participation.
Slums occupying ULB land can be converted to rental housing household as tenant and the ULB as the
social landlord that rents land to the household. A slum which is on ULB land is made of two asset classes-
first, the ULB's land, and second, the housing unit, which is clearly an investment made by the household.
In this context, the ULB can give a 'no eviction guarantee' to the household for 10 years or more, and gain
rent revenue from the household in exchange for the utilization of the ULB land. The ULB can also upgrade
the unit, and recover the investment through rent on land. Occupying households pay rent on the land
occupied, in exchange for a time-bound no-eviction guarantee. They retain ownership of the housing unit
itself. They can invest further in the house and associated services since they have security of tenure for a
definite time period. Existing renters in slums maintain their relationship with their landlords, as these
landlords continue to be the owners of the housing unit, and only become renters of the land. Model
options: Rent, lease or 'Leave and License' models available and can be applied based on tenability
analysis and projected land-use. Rent-price (subject to local-level maximum) could be based on land area
occupied and could be indexed to local rent levels and depreciation value of any infrastructure or unit up-
gradation provided.
The key outcome of this proposition is security of tenure for vulnerable slum households. Security of tenure,
even if for a limited time, allows households to invest in their housing units and reap developmental gains in
health, education, and income. The Ahmedabad Slum Networking Programme has proven that such no-
eviction guarantees for about 10 years or so lead to higher levels of income and better health and
education outcomes. The other critical outcome of this proposition is significant revenue for the ULB. This
model could generate between 15 and 25 % of the ULBs’ revenue.
Page 39 of 41

DRAFT
Annexure: VI – Criteria that may be adopted in identification of target groups for prioritization
1. Tenants by constraint.
 Slum dwellers or homeless people squatting
 Workers who migrated for employment reasons
 Working families who have no access to credit because they have low or non-existent credit
records owing to insufficient or irregular income
 People with special needs
 Street Children
 Aged
 People affected by natural and manmade disaster
 Socially and economically vulnerable people i.e. deserted women, children etc.
 Defaulted borrowers
2. Tenants by choice are usually less numerous:
 Young couples and singles who want to remain mobile
 Middle- and upper-income professionals who do not desire home ownership
 Students
 People Employed in Government, PSUs and other private sector
 Empty nesters who want to downsize after their children have grown
 All other persons who, for work or personal reasons, prefer a short-term residence
 Others as identified by the State/ULBs
Page 40 of 41

DRAFT
Annexure: VII - References
1. National Housing and Habitat Policy-2007
2. Report of the High Level Task Force Affordable Housing for All, December 2008
3. Affordable Housing Task Force Report, November 2012
4. Draft Model Tenancy Act, 2015
5. Report of the Technical Group on Urban Housing Shortage (Tg-12) Urban Housing Shortage (TG-
12) (2012-17), Government of India Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation, National
Buildings Organization (NBO) www.mhupa.gov.in
6. A Policy Guide to Rental Housing in Developing Countries Quick Policy Guide-Volume 1, by Alan
Gilbert, UNHABITAT
7. Quick Guides for Policy Makers, Housing the Poor in Asian Cities- Rental Housing: A much
neglected housing option for the poor, UN-HABITAT & UNESCAP, 2008
8. Rental Housing- Lessons from International Experience and Policies for Emerging Markets by Ira
Gray Peppercorn and Claude Taffin, The World Bank, 2013
9. Affordable Rental Housing, Quarterly Research Note, No.15, March 2012 Infrastructure
Development Finance Company Ltd.
10. Report of the National Commission on Urbanization, August 1988, Vol-I, II, V
11. Report of the National Commission on Urbanization, Interim Report, January 1987
12. Restructuring Housing Agencies in India by K. Dharmarajan & R.M. Kapoor, The Times Research
Foundation 1997
13. Making Rental Housing Work: A Case for Slum Households and ULBs, Swastik Harish – Senior
Consultant, Indian Institute for Human Settlements- June 2015 & Policy brief Instituting Rental
Housing, IIHS
Page 41 of 41