Government of India
Ministry of Water Resources
NATIONAL WATER POLICY (2012)
1. PREAMBLE
1.1 A scarce natural resource, water is fundamental to life, livelihood, food security
and sustainable development. India has more than 18 % of the world’s population,
but has only 4% of world’s renewable water resources and 2.4% of world’s land
area. There are further limits on utilizable quantities of water owing to uneven
distribution over time and space. In addition, there are challenges of frequent floods
and droughts in one or the other part of the country. With a growing population and
rising needs of a fast developing nation as well as the given indications of the impact
of climate change, availability of utilizable water will be under further strain in future
with the possibility of deepening water conflicts among different user groups. Low
consciousness about the scarcity of water and its life sustaining and economic value
results in its mismanagement, wastage, and inefficient use, as also pollution and
reduction of flows below minimum ecological needs. In addition, there are inequities
in distribution and lack of a unified perspective in planning, management and use of
water resources. The objective of the National Water Policy is to take cognizance of
the existing situation, to propose a framework for creation of a system of laws and
institutions and for a plan of action with a unified national perspective.
1.2 The present scenario of water resources and their management in India has
given rise to several concerns, important amongst them are;
(i) Large parts of India have already become water stressed. Rapid growth in
demand for water due to population growth, urbanization and changing lifestyle pose
serious challenges to water security.
(ii) Issues related to water governance have not been addressed adequately.
Mismanagement of water resources has led to a critical situation in many parts of the
country.
(iii) There is wide temporal and spatial variation in availability of water, which may
increase substantially due to a combination of climate change, causing deepening of
water crisis and incidences of water related disasters, i.e., floods, increased erosion
and increased frequency of droughts, etc.
(iv) Climate change may also increase the sea levels. This may lead to salinity
intrusion in ground water aquifers / surface waters and increased coastal inundation
in coastal regions, adversely impacting habitations, agriculture and industry in such
regions.
(v) Access to safe water for drinking and other domestic needs still continues to be a
problem in many areas. Skewed availability of water between different regions and
different people in the same region and also the intermittent and unreliable water
supply system has the potential of causing social unrest.
1

(vi) Groundwater, though part of hydrological cycle and a community resource, is still
perceived as an individual property and is exploited inequitably and without any
consideration to its sustainability leading to its over-exploitation in several areas.
(vii) Water resources projects, though multi-disciplinary with multiple stakeholders,
are being planned and implemented in a fragmented manner without giving due
consideration to optimum utilization, environment sustainability and holistic benefit to
the people.
(viii) Inter-regional, inter-State, intra-State, as also inter-sectoral disputes in sharing
of water, strain relationships and hamper the optimal utilization of water through
scientific planning on basin/sub-basin basis.
(ix) Grossly inadequate maintenance of existing irrigation infrastructure has resulted
in wastage and under-utilization of available resources. There is a widening gap
between irrigation potential created and utilized.
(x) Natural water bodies and drainage channels are being encroached upon, and
diverted for other purposes. Groundwater recharge zones are often blocked.
(xi) Growing pollution of water sources, especially through industrial effluents, is
affecting the availability of safe water besides causing environmental and health
hazards. In many parts of the country, large stretches of rivers are both heavily
polluted and devoid of flows to support aquatic ecology, cultural needs and
aesthetics.
(xii) Access to water for sanitation and hygiene is an even more serious problem.
Inadequate sanitation and lack of sewage treatment are polluting the water sources.
(xiii) Low consciousness about the overall scarcity and economic value of water
results in its wastage and inefficient use.
(xiv) The lack of adequate trained personnel for scientific planning, utilizing modern
techniques and analytical capabilities incorporating information technology
constrains good water management.
(xv) A holistic and inter-disciplinary approach at water related problems is missing.
(xvi) The public agencies in charge of taking water related decisions tend to take
these on their own without consultation with stakeholders, often resulting in poor and
unreliable service characterized by inequities of various kinds.
(xvii) Characteristics of catchment areas of streams, rivers and recharge zones of
aquifers are changing as a consequence of land use and land cover changes,
affecting water resource availability and quality.
1.3 Public policies on water resources need to be governed by certain basic
principles, so that there is some commonality in approaches in dealing with planning,
development and management of water resources. These basic principles are:
2

(i) Planning, development and management of water resources need to be governed
by common integrated perspective considering local, regional, State and national
context, having an environmentally sound basis, keeping in view the human, social
and economic needs.
(ii) Principle of equity and social justice must inform use and allocation of water.
(iii) Good governance through transparent informed decision making is crucial to the
objectives of equity, social justice and sustainability. Meaningful intensive
participation, transparency and accountability should guide decision making and
regulation of water resources.
(iv) Water needs to be managed as a common pool community resource held, by the
state, under public trust doctrine to achieve food security, support livelihood, and
ensure equitable and sustainable development for all.
(v) Water is essential for sustenance of eco-system, and therefore, minimum
ecological needs should be given due consideration.
(vi) Safe Water for drinking and sanitation should be considered as pre-emptive
needs, followed by high priority allocation for other basic domestic needs (including
needs of animals), achieving food security, supporting sustenance agriculture and
minimum eco-system needs. Available water, after meeting the above needs, should
be allocated in a manner to promote its conservation and efficient use.
(vii) All the elements of the water cycle, i.e., evapo-transpiration, precipitation, runoff,
river, lakes, soil moisture, and ground water, sea, etc., are interdependent and the
basic hydrological unit is the river basin, which should be considered as the basic
hydrological unit for planning.
(viii) Given the limits on enhancing the availability of utilizable water resources and
increased variability in supplies due to climate change, meeting the future needs will
depend more on demand management, and hence, this needs to be given priority,
especially through (a) evolving an agricultural system which economizes on water
use and maximizes value from water, and (b) bringing in maximum efficiency in use
of water and avoiding wastages.
(ix) Water quality and quantity are interlinked and need to be managed in an
integrated manner, consistent with broader environmental management approaches
inter-alia including the use of economic incentives and penalties to reduce pollution
and wastage.
(x) The impact of climate change on water resources availability must be factored
into water management related decisions. Water using activities need to be
regulated keeping in mind the local geo climatic and hydrological situation.
3

2. WATER FRAMEWORK LAW
2.1 There is a need to evolve a National Framework Law as an umbrella statement
of general principles governing the exercise of legislative and/or executive (or
devolved) powers by the Centre, the States and the local governing bodies. This
should lead the way for essential legislation on water governance in every State of
the Union and devolution of necessary authority to the lower tiers of government to
deal with the local water situation.
2.2 Such a framework law must recognize water not only as a scarce resource but
also as a sustainer of life and ecology. Therefore, water, particularly, groundwater,
needs to be managed as a community resource held, by the state, under public trust
doctrine to achieve food security, livelihood, and equitable and sustainable
development for all. Existing Acts may have to be modified accordingly.
2.3 There is a need for comprehensive legislation for optimum development of inter-
State rivers and river valleys to facilitate inter-State coordination ensuring scientific
planning of land and water resources taking basin/sub-basin as unit with unified
perspectives of water in all its forms (including precipitation, soil moisture, ground
and surface water) and ensuring holistic and balanced development of both the
catchment and the command areas. Such legislation needs, inter alia, to deal with
and enable establishment of basin authorities, comprising party States, with
appropriate powers to plan, manage and regulate utilization of water resource in the
basins.
3. USES OF WATER
3.1 Water is required for domestic, agricultural, hydro-power, thermal power,
navigation, recreation, etc. Utilisation in all these diverse uses of water should be
optimized and an awareness of water as a scarce resource should be fostered.
3.2 The Centre, the States and the local bodies (governance institutions) must
ensure access to a minimum quantity of potable water for essential health and
hygiene to all its citizens, available within easy reach of the household.
3.3 Ecological needs of the river should be determined, through scientific study,
recognizing that the natural river flows are characterized by low or no flows, small
floods (freshets), large floods, etc., and should accommodate developmental needs.
A portion of river flows should be kept aside to meet ecological needs ensuring that
the low and high flow releases are proportional to the natural flow regime, including
base flow contribution in the low flow season through regulated ground water use.
3.4 Rivers and other water bodies should be considered for development for
navigation as far as possible and all multipurpose projects over water bodies should
keep navigation in mind right from the planning stage.
3.5 In the water rich eastern and north eastern regions of India, the water use
infrastructure is weak and needs to be strengthened in the interest of food security.
4

3.6 Community should be sensitized and encouraged to adapt first to utilization of
water as per local availability of waters, before providing water through long distance
transfer. Community based water management should be institutionalized and
strengthened.
4. ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE
4.1 Climate change is likely to increase the variability of water resources affecting
human health and livelihoods. Therefore, special impetus should be given towards
mitigation at micro level by enhancing the capabilities of community to adopt climate
resilient technological options.
4.2 The anticipated increase in variability in availability of water because of climate
change should be dealt with by increasing water storage in its various forms, namely,
soil moisture, ponds, ground water, small and large reservoirs and their combination.
States should be incentivized to increase water storage capacity, which inter-alia
should include revival of traditional water harvesting structures and water bodies.
4.3 The adaptation strategies could also include better demand management,
particularly, through adoption of compatible agricultural strategies and cropping
patterns and improved water application methods, such as land leveling and/or drip /
sprinkler irrigation as they enhance the water use efficiency, as also, the capability
for dealing with increased variability because of climate change. Similarly, industrial
processes should be made more water efficient.
4.4 Stakeholder participation in land-soil-water management with scientific inputs
from local research and academic institutions for evolving different agricultural
strategies, reducing soil erosion and improving soil fertility should be promoted. The
specific problems of hilly areas like sudden run off, weak water holding capacity of
soil, erosion and sediment transport and recharging of hill slope aquifers should be
adequately addressed.
4.5 Planning and management of water resources structures, such as, dams, flood
embankments, tidal embankments, etc., should incorporate coping strategies for
possible climate changes. The acceptability criteria in regard to new water resources
projects need to be re-worked in view of the likely climate changes
5. ENHANCING WATER AVAILABLE FOR USE
5.1 The availability of water resources and its use by various sectors in various basin
and States in the country need to be assessed scientifically and reviewed at periodic
intervals, say, every five years. The trends in water availability due to various factors
including climate change must be assessed and accounted for during water
resources planning.
5.2 The availability of water is limited but the demand of water is increasing rapidly
due to growing population, rapid urbanization, rapid industrialization and economic
development. Therefore, availability of water for utilization needs to be augmented to
meet increasing demands of water. Direct use of rainfall, desalination and avoidance
5

of inadvertent evapo-transpiration are the new additional strategies for augmenting
utilizable water resources.
5.3 There is a need to map the aquifers to know the quantum and quality of ground
water resources (replenishable as well as non-replenishable) in the country. This
process should be fully participatory involving local communities. This may be
periodically updated.
5.4 Declining ground water levels in over-exploited areas need to be arrested by
introducing improved technologies of water use, incentivizing efficient water use and
encouraging community based management of aquifers. In addition, where
necessary, artificial recharging projects should be undertaken so that extraction is
less than the recharge. This would allow the aquifers to provide base flows to the
surface system, and maintain ecology.
5.5 Inter-basin transfers are not merely for increasing production but also for meeting
basic human need and achieving equity and social justice. Inter-basin transfers of
water should be considered on the basis of merits of each case after evaluating the
environmental, economic and social impacts of such transfers.
5.6 Integrated Watershed development activities with groundwater perspectives
need to be taken in a comprehensive manner to increase soil moisture, reduce
sediment yield and increase overall land and water productivity. To the extent
possible, existing programs like MGNREGA may be used by farmers to harvest rain
water using farm ponds and other soil and water conservation measures.
6. DEMAND MANAGEMENT AND WATER USE EFFICIENCY
6.1 A system to evolve benchmarks for water uses for different purposes, i.e., water
footprints, and water auditing should be developed to promote and incentivize
efficient use of water. The ‘project’ and the ‘basin’ water use efficiencies need to be
improved through continuous water balance and water accounting studies. An
institutional arrangement for promotion, regulation and evolving mechanisms for
efficient use of water at basin/sub-basin level will be established for this purpose at
the national level.
6.2 The project appraisal and environment impact assessment for water uses,
particularly for industrial projects, should, inter-alia, include the analysis of the water
footprints for the use.
6.3 Recycle and reuse of water, including return flows, should be the general norm.
6.4 Project financing should be structured to incentivize efficient & economic use of
water and facilitate early completion of ongoing projects.
6.5 Water saving in irrigation use is of paramount importance. Methods like aligning
cropping pattern with natural resource endowments, micro irrigation (drip, sprinkler,
etc.), automated irrigation operation, evaporation-transpiration reduction, etc., should
be encouraged and incentivized. Recycling of canal seepage water through
conjunctive ground water use may also be considered.
6

6.6 Use of very small local level irrigation through small bunds, field ponds,
agricultural and engineering methods and practices for watershed development, etc,
need to be encouraged. However, their externalities, both positive and negative, like
reduction of sediments and reduction of water availability, downstream, may be kept
in view.
6.7 There should be concurrent mechanism involving users for monitoring if the
water use pattern is causing problems like unacceptable depletion or building up of
ground waters, salinity, alkalinity or similar quality problems, etc., with a view to
planning appropriate interventions.
7. WATER PRICING
7.1 Pricing of water should ensure its efficient use and reward conservation.
Equitable access to water for all and its fair pricing, for drinking and other uses such
as sanitation, agricultural and industrial, should be arrived at through independent
statutory Water Regulatory Authority, set up by each State, after wide ranging
consultation with all stakeholders.
7.2 In order to meet equity, efficiency and economic principles, the water charges
should preferably / as a rule be determined on volumetric basis. Such charges
should be reviewed periodically.
7.3 Recycle and reuse of water, after treatment to specified standards, should also
be incentivized through a properly planned tariff system.
7.4 The principle of differential pricing may be retained for the pre-emptive uses of
water for drinking and sanitation; and high priority allocation for ensuring food
security and supporting livelihood for the poor. Available water, after meeting the
above needs, should increasingly be subjected to allocation and pricing on economic
principles so that water is not wasted in unnecessary uses and could be utilized
more gainfully.
7.5 Water Users Associations (WUAs) should be given statutory powers to collect
and retain a portion of water charges, manage the volumetric quantum of water
allotted to them and maintain the distribution system in their jurisdiction. WUAs
should be given the freedom to fix rates subject to floor rates determined by WRAs.
7.6 The over-drawal of groundwater should be minimized by regulating the use of
electricity for its extraction. Separate electric feeders for pumping ground water for
agricultural use should be considered.
8. CONSERVATION OF RIVER CORRIDORS, WATER BODIES AND
INFRASTRUCTURE
8.1 Conservation of rivers, river corridors, water bodies and infrastructure should be
undertaken in a scientifically planned manner through community participation. The
storage capacities of water bodies and water courses and/or associated wetlands,
the flood plains, ecological buffer and areas required for specific aesthetic
7

recreational and/or social needs may be managed to the extent possible in an
integrated manner to balance the flooding, environment and social issues as per
prevalent laws through planned development of urban areas, in particular.
8.2 Encroachments and diversion of water bodies (like rivers, lakes, tanks, ponds,
etc.) and drainage channels (irrigated area as well as urban area drainage) must not
be allowed, and wherever it has taken place, it should be restored to the extent
feasible and maintained properly.
8.3 Urban settlements, encroachments and any developmental activities in the
protected upstream areas of reservoirs/water bodies, key aquifer recharge areas that
pose a potential threat of contamination, pollution, reduced recharge and those
endanger wild and human life should be strictly regulated.
8.4 Environmental needs of Himalayan regions, aquatic eco-system, wet lands and
embanked flood plains need to be recognized and taken into consideration while
planning.
8.5 Sources of water and water bodies should not be allowed to get polluted. System
of third party periodic inspection should be evolved and stringent punitive actions be
taken against the persons responsible for pollution.
8.6 Quality conservation and improvements are even more important for ground
waters, since cleaning up is very difficult. It needs to be ensured that industrial
effluents, local cess pools, residues of fertilizers and chemicals, etc., do not reach
the ground water.
8.7 The water resources infrastructure should be maintained properly to continue to
get the intended benefits. A suitable percentage of the costs of infrastructure
development may be set aside along with collected water charges, for repair and
maintenance. Contract for construction of projects should have inbuilt provision for
longer periods of proper maintenance and handing over back the infrastructure in
good condition.
8.8 Legally empowered dam safety services need to be ensured in the States as well
as at the Centre. Appropriate safety measures, including downstream flood
management, for each dam should be undertaken on top priority.
9. PROJECT PLANNING AND IMPLEMENTATION
9.1 Considering the existing water stress conditions in India and the likelihood of
further worsening situation due to climate change and other factors, water resources
projects should be planned as per the efficiency benchmarks to be prescribed for
various situations.
9.2 Being inter-disciplinary in nature, water resources projects should be planned
considering social and environmental aspects also in addition to techno-economic
considerations in consultation with project affected and beneficiary families. The
integrated water resources management with emphasis on finding reasonable and
8

generally acceptable solutions for most of the stakeholders should be followed for
planning and management of water resources projects.
9.3 Considering the heavy economic loss due to delay in implementation of projects,
all clearances, including environmental and investment clearances, be made time
bound.
9.4 Concurrent monitoring at project, State and the Central level should be
undertaken for timely interventions to avoid time and cost over-runs.
9.5 All components of water resources projects should be planned and executed in a
pari-passu manner so that intended benefits start accruing immediately and there is
no gap between potential created and potential utilized.
9.6 Local governing bodies like Panchayats, Municipalities, Corporations, etc., and
Water Users Associations, wherever applicable, should be involved in planning of
the projects. The unique needs and aspirations of the Scheduled caste and
Scheduled Tribes, women and other weaker sections of the society should be given
due consideration.
9.7 All water resources projects, including hydro power projects, should be planned
to the extent feasible as multi-purpose projects with provision of storage to derive
maximum benefit from available topology and water resources.
10. MANAGEMENT OF FLOOD & DROUGHT
10.1 While every effort should be made to avert water related disasters like floods
and droughts, through structural and non-structural measures, emphasis should be
on preparedness for flood / drought with coping mechanisms as an option. Greater
emphasis should be placed on rehabilitation of natural drainage system.
10.2 Land, soil, energy and water management with scientific inputs from local,
research and scientific institutions should be used to evolve different agricultural
strategies and improve soil and water productivity to manage droughts. Integrated
farming systems and non-agricultural developments may also be considered for
livelihood support and poverty alleviation.
10.3 In order to prevent loss of land eroded by the river, which causes permanent
loss, revetments, spurs, embankments, etc., should be planned, executed,
monitored and maintained on the basis of morphological studies. This will become
increasingly more important, since climate change is likely to increase the rainfall
intensity, and hence, soil erosion.
10.4 Flood forecasting is very important for flood preparedness and should be
expanded extensively across the country and modernized using real time data
acquisition system and linked to forecasting models. Efforts should be towards
developing physical models for various basin sections, which should be linked to
each other and to medium range weather forecasts to enhance lead time.
9

10.5 Operating procedures for reservoirs should be evolved and implemented in
such a manner to have flood cushion and to reduce trapping of sediment during flood
season. These procedures should be based on sound decision support system.
10.6 Protecting all areas prone to floods and droughts may not be practicable;
hence, methods for coping with floods and droughts have to be encouraged.
Frequency based flood inundation maps should be prepared to evolve coping
strategies, including preparedness to supply safe water during and immediately after
flood events. Communities need to be involved in preparing an action plan for
dealing with the flood/ drought situations.
10.7 To increase preparedness for sudden and unexpected flood related disasters,
dam/embankment break studies, as also preparation and periodic updating of
emergency action plans / disaster management plans should be evolved after
involving affected communities. In hilly reaches, glacial lake outburst flood and
landslide dam break floods studies with periodic monitoring along with
instrumentation, etc., should be carried out.
11. WATER SUPPLY AND SANITATION
11.1 There is a need to remove the large disparity between stipulations for water
supply in urban areas and in rural areas. Efforts should be made to provide improved
water supply in rural areas with proper sewerage facilities. Least water intensive
sanitation and sewerage systems with decentralized sewage treatment plants should
be incentivized.
11.2 Urban and rural domestic water supply should preferably be from surface water
in conjunction with groundwater and rainwater. Where alternate supplies are
available, a source with better reliability and quality needs to be assigned to
domestic water supply. Exchange of sources between uses, giving preference to
domestic water supply should be possible. Also, reuse of urban water effluents from
kitchens and bathrooms, after primary treatment, in flush toilets should be
encouraged, ensuring no human contact.
11.3 Urban domestic water systems need to collect and publish water accounts and
water audit reports indicating leakages and pilferages, which should be reduced
taking into due consideration social issues.
11.4 In urban and industrial areas, rainwater harvesting and de-salinization,
wherever techno-economically feasible, should be encouraged to increase
availability of utilizable water. Implementation of rainwater harvesting should include
scientific monitoring of parameters like hydrogeology, groundwater contamination,
pollution and spring discharges.
11.5 Urban water supply and sewage treatment schemes should be integrated and
executed simultaneously. Water supply bills should include sewerage charges.
11.6 Industries in water short regions may be allowed to either withdraw only the
make up water or should have an obligation to return treated effluent to a specified
standard back to the hydrologic system. Tendencies to unnecessarily use more
10

water within the plant to avoid treatment or to pollute ground water need to be
prevented.
11.7 Subsidies and incentives should be implemented to encourage recovery of
industrial pollutants and recycling / reuse, which are otherwise capital intensive.
12. INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
12.1 There should be a forum at the national level to deliberate upon issues relating
to water and evolve consensus, co-operation and reconciliation amongst party
States. A similar mechanism should be established within each State to amicably
resolve differences in competing demands for water amongst different users of
water, as also between different parts of the State.
12.2 A permanent Water Disputes Tribunal at the Centre should be established to
resolve the disputes expeditiously in an equitable manner. Apart from using the
„good offices‟ of the Union or the State Governments, as the case may be, the paths
of arbitration and mediation may also to be tried in dispute resolution.
12.3 Water resources projects and services should be managed with community
participation. For improved service delivery on sustainable basis, the State
Governments / urban local bodies may associate private sector in public private
partnership mode with penalties for failure, under regulatory control on prices
charged and service standards with full accountability to democratically elected local
bodies.
12.4 Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) taking river basin / sub-basin
as a unit should be the main principle for planning, development and management of
water resources. The departments / organizations at Centre / State Governments
levels should be restructured and made multi-disciplinary accordingly.
12.5 Appropriate institutional arrangements for each river basin should be developed
to collect and collate all data on regular basis with regard to rainfall, river flows, area
irrigated by crops and by source, utilizations for various uses by both surface and
ground water and to publish water accounts on ten daily basis every year for each
river basin with appropriate water budgets and water accounts based on the
hydrologic balances. In addition, water budgeting and water accounting should be
carried out for each aquifers.
12.6 Appropriate institutional arrangements for each river basin should also be
developed for monitoring water quality in both surface and ground waters.
12.7 States should be encouraged and incentivized to undertake reforms and
progressive measures for innovations, conservation and efficient utilization of water
resources.
13. TRANS-BOUNDARY RIVERS
13.1 Even while accepting the principle of basin as a unit of development, on the
basis of practicability and easy implementability, efforts should be made to enter into
11

international agreements with neighbouring countries on bilateral basis for exchange
of hydrological data of international rivers on near real time basis.
13.2 Negotiations about sharing and management of water of international rivers
should be done on bilateral basis in consultative association with riparian States
keeping paramount the national interest. Adequate institutional arrangements at the
Center should be set up to implement international agreements.
14. DATABASE & INFORMATION SYSTEM
14.1 All hydrological data, other than those classified on national security
consideration, should be in public domain. However, a periodic review for further
declassification of data may be carried out. A National Water Informatics Center
should be established to collect, collate and process hydrologic data regularly from
all over the country, conduct the preliminary processing, and maintain in open and
transparent manner on a GIS platform.
14.2 In view of the likely climate change, much more data about snow and glaciers,
evaporation, tidal hydrology and hydraulics, river geometry changes, erosion,
sedimentation, etc. needs to be collected. A programme of such data collection
needs to be developed and implemented.
14.3 All water related data, like rainfall, snowfall, geo-morphological, climatic,
geological, surface water, ground water, water quality, ecological, water extraction
and use, irrigated area, glaciers, etc., should be integrated with well defined
procedures and formats to ensure online updation and transfer of data to facilitate
development of database for informed decision making in the management of water.
15. RESEARCH & TRAINING NEEDS
15.1 Continuing research and advancement in technology shall be promoted to
address issues in the water sector in a scientific manner. Innovations in water
resources sector should be encouraged, recognized and awarded.
15.2 It is necessary to give adequate grants to the States to update technology,
design practices, planning and management practices, preparation of annual water
balances and accounts for the site and basin, preparation of hydrologic balances for
water systems, benchmarking and performance evaluation.
15.3 It needs to be recognized that the field practices in the water sector in advanced
countries have been revolutionized by advances in information technology and
analytical capabilities. A re-training and quality improvement programme for water
planners and managers at all levels in India, both in private and public sectors,
needs to be undertaken.
15.4 An autonomous center for research in water policy should also be established
to evaluate impacts of policy decisions and to evolve policy directives for changing
scenario of water resources.
12

15.5 To meet the need of the skilled manpower in the water sector, regular training
and academic courses in water management should be promoted. These training
and academic institutions should be regularly updated by developing infrastructure
and promoting applied research, which would help to improve the current procedures
of analysis and informed decision making in the line departments and by the
community. A national campaign for water literacy needs to be started for capacity
building of different stakeholders in the water sector.
16. IMPLEMENTATION OF NATIONAL WATER POLICY
16.1 National Water Board should prepare a plan of action based on the National
Water Policy, as approved by the National Water Resources Council, and to
regularly monitor its implementation.
16.2 The State Water Policies may need to be drafted/revised in accordance with
this policy keeping in mind the basic concerns and principles as also a unified
national perspective.
13