Chairperson : Dr. Mrs. Mohini Giri
Members : Mr. M.M. Sabharwal
Mr. K.R. Gangadharan
Dr. Sheilu Sreenivasan
Member Secretary : Mr. P.P. Mitra
National Policy for Senior Citizens
March 2011

National Policy on Senior Citizens 2011
Preface
The National Policy on Older Persons was announced by the Government of India in
the year 1999. It was a step in the right direction in pursuance of the UN General
Assembly Resolution 47/5 to observe 1999 as International Year of Older Persons
and in keeping with the assurances to older persons contained in the Constitution.
The well-being of senior citizens is mandated in the Constitution of India under
Article 41. “The state shall, within the limits of its economic capacity and
development, make effective provision for securing the right to public assistance in
cases of old age”. The Right to Equality is guaranteed by the Constitution as a
fundamental right. Social security is the concurrent responsibility of the central and
state governments.
Subsequent international efforts made an impact on the implementation of the
National Policy on Older Persons. The Madrid Plan of Action and the United Nations
Principles for Senior Citizens adopted by the UN General Assembly in 2002, the
Proclamation on Ageing and the global targets on ageing for the Year 2001 adopted
by the General Assembly in 1992, the Shanghai Plan of Action 2002 and the Macau
Outcome document 2007 adopted by UNESCAP form the basis for the global policy
guidelines to encourage governments to design and implement their own policies
from time to time. The Government of India is a signatory to all these documents
demonstrating its commitment to address the concerns of the elderly.
The policy and plans were put in place by central and state governments for the
welfare of older persons. The state governments issued their policies and
programmes for the welfare of older persons. While some States and Union
Territories implemented their policies with vigour, most states-- particularly the big
ones-- were behind perhaps due to financial and operational deficiencies.)
Pensions, travel concessions, income tax relief, medical benefit, extra interest on
savings, security of older persons through an integrated scheme of the Ministry of
Social Justice and Empowerment as well as financial support was provided for
Homes, Day Care Centres, Medical Vans, Help Lines etc are extended currently.
The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment coordinates programmes to be
undertaken by other Ministries in their relevant areas of support to older persons.
The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment piloted landmark legislation the
Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens‟ Act 2007 which is being
promulgated by the States and Union Territories in stages.
The National Policy of Senior Citizens 2011
Demography of Indian Ageing
The large increase in human life expectancy over the years has resulted not only in a
very substantial increase in the number of older persons but in a major shift in the
age groups of 80 and above. The demographic profile depicts that in the years
2000-2050, the overall population in India will grow by 55% whereas population of
1

National Policy on Senior Citizens 2011
people in their 60 years and above will increase by 326% and those in the age group
of 80+ by 700% - the fastest growing group (see table and graph).
Years Total Population (millions) 60+ (millions) 80+ (millions)
2000 1008 76 6
2050 1572 324 48
Source: World population Ageing: 1950-2050; Department of Economic and Social affairs, Population
Division, United Nations. New York.2002
1/8th of the Worlds Elderly Population lives in India. Most of them will never retire in
the usual sense of the term and will continue to work as long as physically possible.
Inevitably though the disability to produce and earn will decline with age. The
absence on savings will result in sharp declining in living standards that for many can
mean destitution. Therefore this is the challenge of old age income security in India.
As a result of the current ageing scenario, there is a need for all aspects of care for
the Oldest Old (80+ years) namely, socio economic, financial, health and shelter.
2

National Policy on Senior Citizens 2011
Problems in any of these areas have an impact on the quality of life in old age and
healthcare when it is needed. Increase in life span also results in chronic functional
disabilities creating a need for assistance required by the Oldest Old to manage
simple chores. This policy looks at the increasing longevity of people and lack of
care giving.
Elderly Women Need Special Attention
Women and men age differently. Both have their concerns. The problems of elderly
women are exacerbated by a lifetime of gender based discrimination, often
stemming from deep-rooted cultural and social bias. It is compounded by other forms
of discrimination based on class, caste, disability, illiteracy, unemployment and
marital status. Patriarchal hierarchy and access to property rights are also
discriminatory. Burdened with household chores for a longer span of time compared
to older men, older women don‟t have time for leisure or recreational activity. Women
experience proportionately higher rates of chronic illness and disability in later life
than men. Women suffer greater non-communicable diseases and experience lower
social and mental health status, especially if they are single and/or widowed. Over
50% of women over age 80 are widows.
Elderly women and their problems need special attention as their numbers are likely
to increase in the future and, given the multiple disadvantages they face in life, they
are likely to be grossly unprepared to tackle these issues.
Rural Poor Need Special Attention
Many households in rural areas at the bottom of the income distribution in India are
too poor to save for their old age. Available resources are used to meet daily
consumption needs. Even at slightly higher income levels there is likely to be little
demand for savings and pension instruments that require a commitment of several
decades. Instead, the savings of households in the lower deciles of the income
distribution are likely to be earmarked for self-insurance against emergencies; or
perhaps, in short term investments that increase their own productivity or the
productivity of their children. Liquidity is highly valued. The absolute poor in India
cannot be expected to participate in long term savings schemes for old age and they
do not. The poverty in rural areas for older persons is increasing and needs
attention. Hence rural poor would need social security in large measure.
Increasing advancement in technology
There have been several advancements in medical technology , medicine and in
technology for assistive living (and technology) for elderly that have prolonged life for
senior citizens and this needs to be factored in the policy that not only for the eighty
plus but rural poor, women and disadvantaged seniors will have longer years and will
need many of the policy interventions.
3

National Policy on Senior Citizens 2011
Policy Objectives
The foundation of the new policy, known as the “National Policy for Senior Citizens
2011” is based on several factors. These include the demographic explosion among
the elderly, the changing economy and social milieu, advancement in medical
research, science and technology and high levels of destitution among the elderly
rural poor (51 million elderly live below the poverty line). A higher proportion of
elderly women than men experience loneliness and are dependent on children.
Social deprivations and exclusion, privatization of health services and changing
pattern of morbidity affect the elderly. All those of 60 years and above are senior
citizens. This policy addresses issues concerning senior citizens living in urban and
rural areas, special needs of the „oldest old‟ and older women.
In principle the policy values an age integrated society. It will endeavour to
strengthen integration between generations, facilitate interaction between the old
and the young as well as strengthen bonds between different age groups. It believes
in the development of a formal and informal social support system, so that the
capacity of the family to take care of senior citizens is strengthened and they
continue to live in the family. The policy seeks to reach out in particular to the bulk of
senior citizens living in rural areas who are dependent on family bonds and
intergenerational understanding and support.
The focus of the new policy:
1. Mainstream senior citizens, especially older women, and bring their concerns
into the national development debate with priority to implement mechanisms
already set by governments and supported by civil society and senior citizens‟
associations. Support promotion and establishment of senior citizens‟
associations, especially amongst women.
2. Promote the concept of „Ageing in Place‟ or ageing in own home, housing,
income security and homecare services, old age pension and access to
healthcare insurance schemes and other programmes and services to
facilitate and sustain dignity in old age. The thrust of the policy would be
preventive rather than cure.
3. The policy will consider institutional care as the last resort. It recognises that
care of senior citizens has to remain vested in the family which would partner
the community, government and the private sector.
4. Being a signatory to the Madrid Plan of Action and Barrier Free Framework it
will work towards an inclusive, barrier-free and age-friendly society.
5. Recognise that senior citizens are a valuable resource for the country and
create an environment that provides them with equal opportunities, protects
their rights and enables their full participation in society. Towards
achievement of this directive, the policy visualises that the states will extend
their support for senior citizens living below the poverty line in urban and rural
areas and ensure their social security, healthcare, shelter and welfare. It will
protect them from abuse and exploitation so that the quality of their lives
improves.
6. Long term savings instruments and credit activities will be promoted to reach
both rural and urban areas. It will be necessary for the contributors to feel
4

National Policy on Senior Citizens 2011
assured that the payments at the end of the stipulated period are attractive
enough to take care of the likely erosion in purchasing power.
7. Employment in income generating activities after superannuation will be
encouraged.
8. Support and assist organisations that provide counselling, career guidance
and training services.
9. States will be advised to implement the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents
and Senior Citizens Act, 2007 and set up Tribunals so that elderly parents
unable to maintain themselves are not abandoned and neglected.
10. States will set up homes with assisted living facilities for abandoned senior
citizens in every district of the country and there will be adequate budgetary
support.
Areas of intervention
The concerned ministries at central and state level as mentioned in the
„Implementation Section‟ would implement the policy and take necessary steps for
senior citizens as under:
I. Income security in old age
A major intervention required in old age relates to financial insecurity as more
than two third of the elderly live below the poverty line. It would increase with age
uniformly across the country.
1. Indira Gandhi National Old Age Pension Scheme
1. Old age pension scheme would cover all senior citizens living below the
poverty line.
2. Rate of monthly pension would be raised to Rs.1000 per month per person
and revised at intervals to prevent its deflation due to higher cost of
purchasing.
3. The „oldest old‟ would be covered under Indira Gandhi National Old Age
Pension Scheme (IGNOAPS). They would be provided additional pension in
case of disability, loss of adult children and concomitant responsibility for
grand children and women. This would be reviewed every five years.
2. Public Distribution System
4. The public distribution system would reach out to cover all senior citizens
living below the poverty line.
3. Income Tax
5. Taxation policies would reflect sensitivity to the financial problems of senior
citizens which accelerate due to very high costs of medical and nursing care,
transportation and support services needed at homes.
4. Microfinance
5

National Policy on Senior Citizens 2011
6. Loans at reasonable rates of Interest would be offered to senior citizens to
start small businesses. Microfinance for senior citizens would be supported
through suitable guidelines issued by the Reserve Bank of India.
II. Healthcare
With advancing age, senior citizens have to cope with health and associated
problems some of which may be chronic, of a multiple nature, require constant
attention and carry the risk of disability and consequent loss of autonomy. Some
health problems, especially when accompanied by impaired functional capacity
require long term management of illness and nursing care.
7. Healthcare needs of senior citizens will be given high priority. The goal would
be good, affordable health service, heavily subsidized for the poor and a
graded system of user charges for others. It would have a judicious mix of
public health services, health insurance, health services provided by not-for-
profit organizations including trusts and charities, and private medical care.
While the first of these will need to be promoted by the State, the third
category given some assistance, concessions and relief and the fourth
encouraged and subjected to some degree of regulation, preferably by an
association of providers of private care.
8. The basic structure of public healthcare would be through primary healthcare.
It would be strengthened and oriented to meet the health needs of senior
citizens. Preventive, curative, restorative and rehabilitative services will be
expanded and strengthened and geriatric care facilities provided at secondary
and tertiary levels. This will imply much larger public sector outlays, proper
distribution of services in rural and urban areas, and much better health
administration and delivery systems. Geriatric services for all age groups
above 60--- preventive, curative, rehabilitative healthcare will be provided.
The policy will strive to create a tiered national level geriatric healthcare with
focus on outpatient day care, palliative care, rehabilitation care and respite
care.
9. Twice in a year the PHC nurse or the ASHA will conduct a special screening
of the 80+ population of villages and urban areas and public/private
partnerships will be worked out for geriatric and palliative healthcare in rural
areas recognizing the increase of non-communicable diseases (NCD) in the
country.
10. Efforts would be made to strengthen the family system so that it continues to
play the role of primary caregiver in old age. This would be done by
sensitizing younger generations and by providing tax incentives for those
taking care of the older members.
11. Development of health insurance will be given priority to cater to the needs of
different income segments of the population with provision for varying
contributions and benefits. Packages catering to the lower income groups will
be entitled to state subsidy. Concessions and relief will be given to health
insurance to enlarge the coverage base and make it affordable. Universal
application of health insurance – RSBY (Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana)
will be promoted in all districts and senior citizens will be compulsorily
6

National Policy on Senior Citizens 2011
included in the coverage. Specific policies will be worked out for healthcare
insurance of senior citizens.
12. From an early age citizens will be encouraged to contribute to a government
created healthcare fund that will help in meeting the increased expenses on
healthcare after retirement. It will also pay for the health insurance premium in
higher socio economic segments.
13. Special programmes will be developed to increase awareness on mental
health and for early detection and care of those with Dementia and
Alzheimer‟s disease.
14. Restoration of vision and eyesight of senior citizens will be an integral part of
the National Programme for Control of Blindness (NPCB).
15. Use of science and technology such as web based services and devices for
the well being and safety of senior citizens will be encouraged and expanded
to under-serviced areas.
16. National and regional institutes of ageing will be set up to promote geriatric
healthcare. Adequate budgetary support will be provided to these institutes
and a cadre of geriatric healthcare specialists created including professionally
trained caregivers to provide care to the elderly at affordable prices.
17. The current National Programme for Health Care of the Elderly (NPHCE)
being implemented in would be expanded immediately and, in partnership
with civil society organizations, scaled up to all districts of the country.
18. Public private partnership models will be developed wherever possible to
implement healthcare of the elderly.
19. Services of mobile health clinics would be made available through PHCs or a
subsidy would be granted to NGOs who offer such services.
20. Health Insurance cover would be provided to all senior citizens through public
funded schemes, especially those over 80 years who do not pay income tax.
21. Hospices and palliative care of the terminally ill would be provided in all
district hospitals and the Indian protocol on palliative care will be disseminated
to all doctors and medical professionals.
22. Recognize gender based attitudes towards health and develop programmes
for regular health checkups especially for older women who tend to neglect
their problems.
III. Safety and Security
23. Provision would be made for stringent punishment for abuse of the elderly.
24. Abuse of the elderly and crimes against senior citizens especially widows and
those living alone and disabled would be tackled by community awareness
and policing.
25. Police would be directed to keep a friendly vigil and monitor programmes
which will include a comprehensive planfor security of senior citizens whether
living alone or as couples. They would also promote mechanisms for
interaction of the elderly with neighbourhood associations and enrolment in
special programmes in urban and rural areas.
26. Protective services would be established and linked to help lines, legal aid
and other measures.
IV. Housing
7

National Policy on Senior Citizens 2011
Shelter is a basic human need. The stock of housing for different income
segments will be increased. Ten percent of housing schemes for urban and rural
lower income segments will be earmarked for senior citizens. This will include the
Indira Awas Yojana and other schemes of the government.
27. Age friendly, barrier-free access will be created in buses and bus stations,
railways and railway stations, airports and bus transportation within the
airports, banks, hospitals, parks, places of worship, cinema halls, shopping
malls and other public places that senior citizens and the disabled frequent.
28. Develop housing complexes for single older men and women, and for those
with need for specialized care in cities, towns and rural areas.
29. Promote age friendly facilities and standards of universal design by Bureau of
Indian Standards.
30. Since a multi-purpose centre is a necessity for social interaction of senior
citizens, housing colonies would reserve sites for establishing such centres.
Segregation of senior citizens in housing colonies would be discouraged and
their integration into the community supported.
31. Senior citizens will be given loans for purchase of houses as well as for major
repairs, with easy repayment schedules.
V. Productive Ageing
32. The policy will promote measures to create avenues for continuity in
employment and/or post retirement opportunities.
33. Directorate of Employment would be created to enable seniors find re-
employment.
34. The age of retirement would be reviewed by the Ministry due to increasing
longevity.
VI. Welfare
35. A welfare fund for senior citizens will be set up by the government and
revenue generated through a social security cess. The revenue generated
from this would be allocated to the states in proportion to their share of senior
citizens. States may also create similar funds.
36. Non-institutional services by voluntary organizations will be promoted and
assisted to strengthen the capacity of senior citizens and their families to deal
with problems of the ageing.
37. All senior citizens, especially widows, single women and the „oldest old‟ would
be eligible for all schemes of government. They would be provided universal
identity under the Aadhar scheme on priority.
38. Larger budgetary allocations would be earmarked to pay attention to the
special needs of rural and urban senior citizens living below the poverty line.
VII. Multigenerational bonding
39. The policy would focus on promoting bonding of generations
and multigenerational support by incorporating relevant educational
material in school curriculum and promoting value education. School
8

National Policy on Senior Citizens 2011
Value Education modules and text books promoting family values of
caring for parents would be promoted by NCERT and State
Educational Bodies.
VIII. Media
40. Media has an important role to play in highlighting the changing
situation of senior citizens and in identifying emerging issues and areas
of action.
41. Involve mass media as well as informal and traditional communication channels
on ageing issues
Natural disasters/ emergencies
42. Provide equal access to food, shelter, medical care and other services to
senior citizens during and after natural disasters and emergencies.
43. Enhance financial grants and other relief measures to assist senior
citizens to re-establish and reconstruct their communities and rebuild their
social fabric following emergencies.
Implementation Mechanism
There will be efforts to provide an identity for senior citizens across the country and
the ADHAAR Unique identity number will be offered to them so that implementation
of assistance schemes of Government of India and concessions can be offered to
them. As part of the policy implementation the Government will strive for:
I. Establishment of Department of Senior Citizens under the Ministry of Social
Justice and Empowerment
The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment will establish a “Department of
Senior Citizens” which will be the nodal agency for implementing programmes
and services for senior citizens and the NPSC 2011. An inter-ministerial
committee will pursue matters relating to implementation of the national policy
and monitor its progress. Coordination will be by the nodal ministry. Each ministry
will prepare action plans to implement aspects that concern them and submit
regular reviews.
II. Establishment of Directorates of Senior Citizens in states and union territories
States and union territories will set up separate Directorates of Senior Citizens for
implementing programmes and services for senior citizens and the NPSC 2011.
III. National/State Commission for Senior Citizens
A National Commission for Senior Citizens at the centre and similar commissions
at the state level will be constituted. The Commissions would be set up under an
9

National Policy on Senior Citizens 2011
Act of the Parliament with powers of Civil Courts to deal with cases pertaining to
violations of rights of senior citizens.
IV. Establishment of National Council for Senior Citizens
A National Council for Senior Citizens, headed by the Minister for Social Justice
and Empowerment will be constituted by the Ministry. With tenure of five years,
the Council will monitor the implementation of the policy and advise the
government on concerns of senior citizens. A similar body would be established
in every state with the concerned minister heading the State Council for Senior
Citizens.
The Council would include representatives of relevant central ministries, the
Planning Commission and ten states by rotation.
Representatives of senior citizens associations from every state and Union
Territory.
Representatives of NGOs, academia, media and experts on ageing.
The council would meet once in six months.
V. Responsibility for Implementation
The Ministries of Home Affairs, Health & Family Welfare, Rural Development,
Urban Development, Youth Affairs & Sports, Railways, Science & Technology,
Statistics & Programme Implementation, Labour, Panchayati Raj and
Departments of Elementary Education & Literacy, Secondary & Higher
Education, Road Transport & Highways, Public Enterprises, Revenue, Women &
Child Development, Information Technology and Personnel & Training will setup
necessary mechanism for implementation of the policy. A five-year perspective
Plan and annual plans setting targets and financial allocations will be prepared by
each Ministry/ Department. The annual report of these Ministries/ Departments
will indicate progress achieved during the year. This will enable monitoring by the
designated authority.
VI. Role of Block Development Offices, Panchayat Raj Institutions and Tribal
Councils/Gram Sabhas
Block Development offices would appoint nodal officers to serve as a one point
contact for senior citizens to ease access to pensions and handle documentation
and physical presence requirements, especially by the elderly women.
Panchayat Raj Institutions would be directed to implement the NPSC 2011 and
address local issues and needs of the ageing population.
In rural/ tribal areas, the tribal council or gram sabha or the relevant Panchayat
Raj institution would be responsible for implementation of the policy.
The provisions of the 13th Finance Commission for special funding to them would
be made applicable.
10

National Policy on Senior Citizens 2011
11