No. 238/78/2017-Wind
Ministry of New & Renewable Energy
(Wind Energy Division)
Block No.14, CGO Complex,
Lodhi Road, New Delhi-110003
Dated: 14 May 2018
National Wind-Solar Hybrid Policy
Ministry of New & Renewable Energy issued draft National Wind-solar
Hybrid Policy in June 2016. The Policy has been finalized after having detailed
consultation with stakeholders.
2. The National Wind-solar Hybrid Policy is hereby released by the Ministry
for information of all stakeholders and general public.
[J. K. Jethani]
Scientist-E

NATIONAL WIND-SOLAR HYBRID POLICY
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1 India has set an ambitious target of reaching 175 GW of installed
capacity from renewable energy sources by the year 2022, which includes
100 GW of solar and 60 GW of wind power capacity. Various policy
initiatives have been taken to achieve this target. At the end of 2017-18
the total renewable power installed capacity in the country was almost 70
GW.
1.2 Solar and wind power being variable in nature pose certain
challenges on grid security and stability. Studies revealed that in India
solar and wind resources are complementary to each other and
hybridization of these two technologies would help in minimizing the
variability apart from optimally utilizing the infrastructure including land
and transmission system.
1.3 Superimposition of wind and solar resource maps shows that there
are large areas where both wind and solar have high to moderate
potential.
1.4 The existing wind farms have scope of adding solar PV capacity
and similarly there may be wind potential in the vicinity of existing solar
PV plant.
1.5 Suitable policy interventions are therefore, required not only for new
wind-solar hybrid plants but also for encouraging hybridization of existing
wind and solar plants.

1.6 To smoothen the wind solar hybrid power further, appropriate
capacity of battery storage may also be added to the project.
2. AIMS AND OBJECTIVE
2.1 The main objective of the Policy is to provide a framework for
promotion of large grid connected wind-solar PV hybrid system for optimal
and efficient utilization of transmission infrastructure and land, reducing
the variability in renewable power generation and achieving better grid
stability.
2.2 Policy also aims to encourage new technologies, methods and way-
outs involving combined operation of wind and solar PV plants.
3. PERIOD OF ENFORCEMENT
This policy will remain in force unless withdrawn, modified or superseded
by the Government. The Government will undertake a review of this Policy
as and when required.
4. WIND-SOLAR HYBRID SYSTEMS
4.1 Under the category of wind-solar hybrid power plants, Wind Turbine
Generators (WTGs) and Solar PV systems will be configured to operate
at the same point of grid connection. There can be different approaches
towards integrating wind and solar depending upon the size of each of the
source integrated and the technology type.
4.2 In case of fixed speed wind turbines connected to grid using an
induction generator, the integration can be on the HT side at the AC output
bus. However, in case of variable speed wind turbines deploying inverters

for connecting the generator to the grid, the wind and the Solar PV system
can be connected to the intermediate DC bus of the AC-DC-AC converter.
4.3 The second important aspect would be related to the sizing – which
would depend on the resource characteristics. In order to achieve the
benefits of hybrid plant in terms of optimal and efficient utilization of
transmission infrastructure and better grid stability by reducing the
variability in renewable power generation, in the locations where the wind
power density is quite good, the size of the solar PVs capacity to be added
as the solar-hybrid component could be relatively smaller. On the other
hand, in case of the sites where the wind power density is relatively lower
or moderate, the component of the solar PV capacity could be relatively
on a higher side.
However, a wind-solar plant will be recognized as hybrid plant if the rated
power capacity of one resource is at least 25% of the rated power capacity
of other resource.
5. IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGY
5.1 The implementation of wind solar hybrid system will depend on
different configurations and use of technology.
a. Wind-Solar Hybrid- AC integration:
In this configuration the AC output of the both the wind and solar
systems is integrated either at LT side or at HT side. In the later
case both system uses separate step-up transformer and HT output
of both the system is connected to common AC Bus-bar. Suitable
control equipment are deployed for controlling the power output of
hybrid system.

b. Wind-Solar Hybrid- DC integration:
DC integration is possible in case of variable speed drive wind
turbines using convertor-inverter. In this configuration the DC output
of the both the wind and solar PV plant is connected to a common
DC bus and a common invertors suitable for combined output AC
capacity is used to convert this DC power in to AC power.
5.2 New Wind-Solar Hybrid Plants:
New wind-solar hybrid projects shall be encouraged with following
provisions:-
i. The hybrid power generated from the wind-solar hybrid project may
be used for (a) captive purpose; (b) sale to third party through open
access; (c) sale to the distribution company (ies) either at tariff
determined by the respective SERC or at tariff discovered through
transparent bidding process; and (d) sale to the distribution
company (ies) at APPC under REC mechanism and avail RECs.
ii. The power procured from the hybrid project may be used for
fulfilment of solar RPO and non-solar RPO in the proportion of rated
capacity of solar and wind power in the hybrid plant respectively.
iii. For procurement of hybrid power through transparent bidding
process different parameters may be used. Parameters that may be
considered for bidding could be capacity delivered at grid interface
point, effective CUF and unit price of electricity.
iv. Government entities may invite bids for new hybrid plants keeping
qualifying criteria such as those discussed in iii above, the tariff
being the main criteria for selection.

5.3 Hybridisation of existing wind/solar PV plants:
Existing wind or solar power projects, willing to install solar PV plant
or WTGs respectively to avail benefit of hybrid project, may be allowed to
do so with following Conditions:
i. No additional connectivity/transmission capacity charges shall be
levied by the respective transmission entity for hybridisation at
existing wind/solar PV plants if already granted transmission
connectivity/ access is being used. Transmission charges may be
applicable for the additional transmission capacity/ access granted
as per prevailing regulation.
ii. In case capacity margins are available at the receiving transmission
sub-station of respective transmission entity, at which the existing
wind/solar projects is connected, additional transmission
capacity/access may be allowed subject to its technical feasibility.
In such a case, any transmission augmentation required up to the
receiving transmission sub-station will be the responsibility of project
developer.
iii. In case of AC integration assessment of solar and wind power
injected from the hybrid project in to the grid will be worked out by
apportioning the reading of main meter installed at the receiving
station on the basis of readings of ABT meters installed on LT or HT
side of the wind and solar PV plant as the case may be.
iv. In case of DC integration assessment of solar and wind power
injected from the hybrid project in to the grid will be worked out by
apportioning the reading of main meter installed at the receiving
station on the basis of readings of DC meters installed at the DC
output of the wind and solar PV plant. Till such time the methodology

for DC metering of hybrid systems and standards & regulations are
framed for DC meters, only AC integration will be permitted.
v. The additional solar/wind power generated from the hybrid project
may be used for (a) captive purpose; (b) sale to third party through
open access; (c) sale to the distribution company (ies) either at tariff
determined by the respective SERC or at tariff discovered through
transparent bidding process; and (d) sale to the distribution
company (ies) at APPC under REC mechanism and avail RECs. For
bidding purpose, State or Central entities may bid for hybridization
of existing projects connected to InSTS or ISTS as the case may be.
vi. Government entities may invite bids for hybridisation of existing wind
and solar plants with tariff being the main criteria for selection.
vii. The additional solar/wind power procured from hybrid project shall
be used for fulfilment of solar/non-solar RPO as the case may be.
5.4 Battery Storage:
Battery storage may be added to the hybrid project (i) to reduce the
variability of output power from wind solar hybrid plant; (ii) providing higher
energy output for a given capacity (bid/ sanctioned capacity) at delivery
point, by installing additional capacity of wind and solar power in a wind
solar hybrid plant; and (iii) ensuring availability of firm power for a
particular period.
Bidding factors for wind solar hybrid plants with battery storage may
include minimum firm power output throughout the day or for defined
hours during the day, extent of variability allowed in output power, unit
price of electricity, etc.

6. REGULATORY REQUIREMENTS
The Central Electricity Authority and CERC shall formulate necessary
standards and regulations including metering methodology and
standards, forecasting and scheduling regulations, REC mechanism,
grant of connectivity and sharing of transmission lines, etc. for wind-solar
hybrid systems.
7. STANDARD AND QUALITY
For wind turbines, solar modules and balance of systems, the technical
guidelines issued by the Ministry from time to time for grid connected
systems will be followed.
8. INCENTIVES
The Government will encourage development wind-solar hybrid systems
through different schemes and programmes. All fiscal and financial
incentives available to wind and solar power projects will also be made
available to hybrid projects.
9. RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
Government will support the technology development projects in the field
of wind-solar hybrid systems. Besides, support will be provided for
development of standards for hybrid systems.