Government of India
Ministry of Commerce & Industry
Department of Industrial Policy & Promotion
(Manufacturing Policy Section)
PRESS NOTE NO. 2 (2011 SERIES)
Subject: National Manufacturing Policy.
^^^^^
The Government of India has announced a national manufacturing policy with
the objective of enhancing the share of manufacturing in GDP to 25% within a decade
and creating 100 million jobs. It also seeks to empower rural youth by imparting
necessary skill sets to make them employable. Sustainable development is integral to
the spirit of the policy and technological value addition in manufacturing has received
special focus.
2. The share of manufacturing in India’s GDP has stagnated at 15-16% since 1980
while the share in comparable economies in Asia is much higher at 25 to 34%.
3. Inadequate physical infrastructure, complex regulatory environment and
inadequate availability of skilled manpower have constrained the growth of
manufacturing in India.
4. Recognizing that the manufacturing sector has a multiplier effect on the creation
of jobs, even in allied sectors, the government has brought out this policy.
5. The policy is based on the principle of industrial growth in partnership with the
States. The Central Government will create the enabling policy frame work, provide
incentives for infrastructure development on a Public Private Partnership (PPP) basis
through appropriate financing instruments, and State Governments will be encouraged
to adopt the instrumentalities provided in the policy.
6. The proposals in the policy are generally sector neutral, location neutral and
technology neutral except incentivization of green technology. While the National
Investment and Manufacturing Zones (NIMZs) are an important instrumentality, the
proposals contained in the Policy apply to manufacturing industry throughout the
country including wherever industry is able to organize itself into clusters and adopt a
model of self-regulation as enunciated.
7. The approved policy document is annexed to this Press Note.
(Anjali Prasad)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India
File No. 10 (6) / 2010 – MPS Dated: 04th November, 2011.
Copy forwarded to Press Information Officer, Press Information Bureau, Shastri Bhawan,
New Delhi, for giving wide publicity to the above Press Note.
Page 1 of 31

ANNEX to PRESS NOTE NO. 2 (2011 SERIES)
NATIONAL MANUFACTURING POLICY
PREFACE
The concern about the stagnant and low share of the manufacturing sector in
India’s GDP necessitated a dedicated policy for the sector with a view to accelerated
development, inclusive growth and provision of gainful employment. The DIPP’s
vision to increase the share of manufacturing in GDP from 16% to 25% was
endorsed in the conference of State Industry Ministers on 17 November 2009. The
Hon’ble Commerce and Industry Minister made an announcement thereafter that the
Government will come out with a manufacturing policy. Following this
announcement, a draft was prepared and placed on the department’s website on 31
March 2010 for stakeholder comments. As a response, the NMCC proposed a draft
national manufacturing policy. Recently, the Planning Commission has prepared
what it calls the National Manufacturing Plan. Relevant points from the NMCC and
the Planning Commission papers have been incorporated in this policy document
wherever appropriate.
Concomitant policy interventions which impact the manufacturing sector but which
can be taken up for development of national policies in the medium term have not
been directly addressed in this document. The Planning Commission has identified
these as : digitization of land and resource maps and creation of land banks by
states; water zoning; offset policy; fiscal and exchange rate measures; strategic
acquisitions; development of world class manufacturing management capabilities;
trade policy especially boosting India’s exports; and reforming the role of public
sector enterprises. A lower emission inclusive growth strategy is another important
area.These issues may be addressed through separate policy initiatives.
This Policy document has been prepared after extensive stakeholder consultations
and inputs from the industry, state governments and experts in the field of
manufacturing, technology development, and business environment. The policy
seeks to present specific action points in the areas identified as constraints that
require immediate policy attention. There could be several other constraints which
affect the sector but it is not possible to deal with all of them at the same time. This
policy therefore does not claim to address all possible issues affecting the
manufacturing sector in India but those that are critical to its growth at this juncture.
Page 2 of 31

Part-A
1. POLICY STATEMENT
1.1 In the last two decades, Indian economy has witnessed a transformational
change and has emerged as one of the fastest growing economies of the world.
Industrial development in Independent India was catalysed by three major industrial
policy resolutions of Government of India in 1948, 1956 and 1991, which provided a
strong industrial base. Economic reforms unveiled in 1991, have brought about a
structural shift enabling the private sector to assume a much larger role in all sectors
of economy. However, the growth of GDP in India has largely been enabled by a
dynamic growth in the services sector.
1.2 Though in the recent past, the growth of the manufacturing sector has
generally outpaced the overall growth rate of the economy, at just over 16 percent of
GDP, the contribution of the manufacturing sector in India is much below its
potential.
1.3 This situation is a cause of concern especially when seen in the context of
transformation registered in this sector by other Asian countries in similar stages of
development. The increasing gap in the sectoral share and the productivity of the
manufacturing sector, between India and these economies, indicates that we have
not been able to fully leverage the opportunities provided by the dynamics of
globalization.
1.4 This also has attendant socio economic manifestations in terms of over
dependence of a large section of the population on agriculture for its livelihood,
disguised unemployment and urban unemployment. India has a favourable
demographic profile with over 60% of population in the working age group of 15-59
years. For a country with the largest young population in the world, this creates a
challenge of significant magnitude. Over the next decade, India has to create gainful
employment opportunities for a large section of its population, with varying degrees
of skills and qualifications. This will entail creation of 220 million jobs by 2025 in
order to reap the demographic dividend. The manufacturing sector would have to be
the bulwark of this employment creation initiative. Every job created in manufacturing
has a multiplier effect of creating two to three additional jobs in related activities.
Therefore, a thrust on manufacturing is integral to the inclusive growth agenda of the
government.
1.5 Besides the employment imperative, the development of the manufacturing
sector is critical from the point of view of ensuring that the growth model of India is
sustainable by providing value addition to our natural and agricultural resources,
addressing our strategic needs, and developing new technologies for the welfare of
our citizens.
1.6 The relatively low level of ‘value-addition’ in the products manufactured in the
country, and the growing imports of capital equipment – the building blocks of a
country’s manufacturing competitiveness also needs to be addressed urgently.
Acquiring depth in manufacturing is crucial from the stand point of long-term
competitiveness in strategic areas of economy such as defence and tele-
Page 3 of 31

communication. It is important to have a strong indigenous value chain addition
element from the stand point of national security.
1.7 Finally, the growth of the manufacturing sector has to be made sustainable,
particularly ensuring environmental sustainability through green technologies, energy
efficiency, and optimal utilization of natural resources and restoration of damaged /
degraded eco-systems.
1.8 Developments of Indian manufacturing sector calls for deepening and
recalibrating of economic reforms that would strengthen the sector and make it grow
faster and become an engine of inclusive growth.
1.9 Government of India decided to bring out the National Manufacturing Policy to
bring about a quantitative and qualitative change with the following six objectives:
i. Increase manufacturing sector growth to 12-14% over the medium term to
make it the engine of growth for the economy. The 2 to 4 % differential over
the medium term growth rate of the overall economy will enable
manufacturing to contribute at least 25% of the National GDP by 2022.
ii. Increase the rate of job creation in manufacturing to create 100 million
additional jobs by 2022.
iii. Creation of appropriate skill sets among the rural migrant and urban poor to
make growth inclusive.
iv. Increase domestic value addition and technological ‘depth’ in manufacturing.
v. Enhance global competitiveness of Indian manufacturing through
appropriate policy support.
vi. Ensure sustainability of growth, particularly with regard to the environment
including energy efficiency, optimal utilization of natural resources and
restoration of damaged/ degraded eco-systems.
1.10 In order to achieve these goals:-
i. Foreign investments and technologies will be welcomed while leveraging
the country's expanding market for manufactured goods to induce the
building of more manufacturing capabilities and technologies within the
country;
ii. Competitiveness of enterprises in the country will be the guiding principle
in the design and implementation of policies and programmes;
iii. Compliance burden on industry arising out of procedural and regulatory
formalities will be reduced through rationalization of business regulations.
iv. Innovation will be encouraged for augmenting productivity, quality, and
growth of enterprises; and
v. Effective consultative mechanism with all stake holders will be instituted to
ensure mid-course corrections.
1.11 The following industry verticals will be given special attention:
i. Employment intensive industries: Adequate support will be given to
promote and strengthen employment intensive industries to ensure job
creation. Special attention will be given in respect of textiles and garments;
leather and footwear; gems and jewellery; and food processing industries.
Page 4 of 31

ii. Capital Goods: A robust economic growth would necessitate a strong
demand for capital goods. Such growth would create a strong and continuing
demand for capital goods. The capital goods industry, which is the mother
industry for manufacturing has not grown at the desired pace. A special focus
will be given to machine tools; heavy electrical equipments; heavy transport,
earth moving and mining equipments.
Time bound programmes will be initiated for building strong capacities with
R&D facilities and also to encourage growth and development of these
capacities in the private sector while strategically strengthening the public
sector to complement the private initiatives where essential.
iii. Industries with strategic significance: A strategic requirement of the
country would warrant the launch of programmes to build national capabilities
to make India a major force in sectors like aerospace; shipping; IT hardware
and electronics; telecommunication equipment; defence equipment; and solar
energy. Mission mode projects will be conceptualised in each of these
sectors, recognizing the fact that a mission on solar energy has already been
launched under the National Action Plan on Climate Change.
iv. Industries where India enjoys a competitive advantage: India’s large
domestic market coupled with a strong engineering base has created
indigenous expertise and cost effective manufacturing in automobiles;
pharmaceuticals; and medical equipment. The concerned ministries will be
formulating special programmes to consolidate strong industry base to retain
the global leadership position.
v. Small and Medium Enterprises : The SME sector contributes about 45% to
the manufacturing output, 40% of the total exports, and offers employment
opportunities both for self-employment and jobs, across diverse geographies.
A healthy rate of growth shall be ensured for the overall growth of the
manufacturing sector as also the national economy by policy interventions in
areas like manufacturing management, including accelerated adoption of
Information technology; skill development; access to capital; marketing;
procedural simplification and governance reform.
The National Manufacturing Competitiveness Programme, being implemented
by M/o MSME will be strengthened, and the recommendations of Task Force
on MSME for creation of a separate fund with SIDBI, strengthening of NSIC,
modification of lending norms and inclusion of lending to MSMEs under
‘priority sector’ lending will be given due regard in taking appropriate
measures.
vi. Public Sector Enterprises: Public Sector Undertakings, especially those in
Defence and Energy sectors, continue to play a major role in the growth of
Page 5 of 31

manufacturing as well as of the national economy. A suitable policy
framework will be formulated in this regard to make PSUs competitive while
ensuring functional autonomy.
1.12 Specific policy instruments have been conceptualized to achieve the
objectives stated above. These instruments which are outlined in greater detail in
Part-B of the Policy document broadly cover the following areas:-
i. Rationalization and simplification of business regulations;
ii. Simple and expeditious exit mechanism for closure of sick units while
protecting labour interests;
iii. Financial and institutional mechanisms for technology development,
including green technologies;
iv. Industrial training and skill up gradation measures;
v. Incentives for SMEs;
vi. Special Focus Sectors;
vii. Leveraging infrastructure deficit and government procurement -
including defence;
viii. Clustering and aggregation : National Investment and Manufacturing
Zones (NIMZs);
ix. Trade Policy.
1.13 Global experience of manufacturing has shown the advantages of clustering
and agglomeration as it enhances supply chain responsiveness, provides easier
access to market, talent and substantially lowers logistic costs. Though the
government has been executing multiple schemes for promoting industrial clusters,
full benefits of agglomeration are yet to be realized. One of the key instruments to
catalyze the growth of manufacturing will be establishment of National Investment
and Manufacturing Zones (NIMZs) which will be developed in the nature of green
field industrial townships, benchmarked with the best manufacturing hubs in the
world. These will also help us to meet the increasing demand for creating world-
class urban centres in India, while will also absorb surplus labour by providing them
gainful employment opportunities. These NIMZs will seek to address the
infrastructural bottleneck which has been cited as a constraining factor for the growth
of manufacturing.
1.14 A comprehensive exit policy will be put in place which will promote
productivity while providing flexibility by removing rigidity in the labour market and
ensuring protection of workers’ rights as laid down in the statute.
1.15 The growth of manufacturing has to come hand in hand with the concerted
thrust on skill development programme. The National Skill Development Initiative
launched by the Government of India has provided a renewed thrust to build
productive capacities. This Policy seeks to make skill development integral to
Page 6 of 31

productive enterprise in the country which would be supported by robust government
institutions.
1.16 The thrust with regard to labour management will be to encourage unions and
employers to develop better institutional arrangements in the states, and within
production units, through dialogue and consultation. The stress will be on
rationalisation in employment laws and in shop floor practices.
1.17 Manufacturing management will be given a focused attention as it will
facilitate improvement of productivity, quality and competitiveness of manufacturing
enterprise. Industry will be encouraged to collaborate with higher educational
institutions to develop curricula for grooming graduate engineers and supervisory
managers for various facets of manufacturing.
1.18 In the context of sustainable development and in order to drive the “greening”
of manufacturing operations and to explore the emerging technologies in this area,
which offer opportunities to build local and global leadership, the government will
take recourse to both regulatory as well as market based policy interventions.
Government would prescribe emission and discharge standards, excluding green
house gas emissions, and the choice of technologies to meet the standards would
be decided by the project promoters. The Government will provide continuous
incentives, monetary and otherwise, to encourage polluting entities to reduce
releases of harmful pollutants to ensure that the standards are complied with.
1.19 Land has emerged as a major constraint for industrial growth in recent years.
The Government will take measures to make industrial land available, which is
critical for sustained industrial growth through creation of land banks by States;
digitization of land and resources maps; and programmes for utilization of lands
locked under non productive uses, including defunct or sick industries.
1.20 Manufacturing and technology development are closely inter-connected as
technologies become useful when they are converted into products through
manufacturing and the feedback from manufacturing fosters continuing technology
development.
1.21 By leveraging the strength of our large market, policies and measures will be
taken to ensure access for Indian companies to foreign technologies as well as
development of advanced indigenous technologies. These would include:
i. Incentives, in the form of tax concessions and government subsidies,
for indigenous development of technology;
ii. Partnerships between industries and government laboratories;
iii. Preferential purchases by government agencies of indigenously
developed products and technologies;
iv. Judicious development of an Intellectual Property regime to enable
more collaborative innovation, as well as more indigenous innovation
and improved access to environmentally friendly technologies. India
will be very cautious about further expansions beyond the present
TRIPS regime which could have implications on development and
ownership of technologies within the country and
v. Joint ventures between foreign companies and Indian partners.
Page 7 of 31

1.22 Trade and investment policy are inextricably linked with manufacturing policy
to ensure greater harmony of objectives. While India will continue to integrate itself
with the globalised world through bilateral and regional free trade
agreements/comprehensive economic partnership agreements, it will be ensured
that such agreements do not have a detrimental effect on domestic manufacturing in
India. The government will also consider use of public procurement in specified
sectors with stipulation of local value addition in areas of critical technologies and
wherever necessary such as solar energy equipment, electronic hardware, fuel
efficient transport equipment and IT based security systems.
1.23 The growth of manufacturing at over 12 percent per annum over the medium
to long term would exert a lot of pressure on raw materials markets. Arrangements
for assured supply of such materials over the long term will be put in place.
Acquisition of advanced technology companies would facilitate transfer of technology
to the parent manufacturing company, while acquisition of companies enjoying better
brand value or strategic location advantages would enhance market access of Indian
firms. For these to be achieved a clear set of policy guidelines will be put in place by
the Government.
1.24 Implementation of the policy is as important as policy making itself, as unless
properly implemented, the policy by itself will not deliver the desired result. In order
to ensure effective implementation of the Policy, a manufacturing policy review
mechanism will be instituted and a high-level committee chaired by Secretary,
Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion will monitor the implementation on a
regular basis. A Manufacturing Industry Promotion Board (MIPB) at the level of
Union Minister of Commerce and Industry will be constituted to ensure coordination
amongst Central Ministries and State Governments. State Governments would need
to be equal partners in giving effect to this policy and the State Industry Ministers
Conference will be convened on a half-yearly basis to initiate a dialogue for giving a
focused thrust to manufacturing.
Page 8 of 31

Part B
2. RATIONALIZATION AND SIMPLIFICATION OF BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Rationalization of Regulatory Procedures
2.1 On an average, a manufacturing unit needs to comply with nearly 70 laws and
regulations. Apart from facing multiple inspections, these units have to file sometime
as many as 100 returns in a year. This kind of compliance burden puts-off young
entrepreneurs and they are not willing to take up an entrepreneurial role. As a result,
a large number of people who could have been self employed and would contribute
to further employment and enhance economic activity, end up accepting jobs much
below their potential.
2.2 A number of efforts have been made in the past to bring down this compliance
burden. There have been attempts at single window systems and fast track
approvals. In certain cases technology has been leveraged to enable electronic
approvals. These efforts have been only partially successful, because different
Government departments are not willing to shed or reinvent their roles. The
Government has to recognise the need to reinvent itself and allow the industry to self
regulate itself to the extent possible. The objective of an act or regulation should be
achieved without being intrusive and giving rise to complaints of corruption.
2.3 Several provisions of different acts may either be rationalised or implemented
in cooperation with public or private institutions under the overall control of statutory
authorities to facilitate the entrepreneurs. It is, therefore, proposed to have the
following framework:
i) Central/ State Governments may provide exemptions subject to fulfilment of
conditions as provided in the statute. SPV may act as a facilitator in this
regard.
ii) Mechanisms may be developed for cooperation of public or private institutions
with government inspection services under the overall control of statutory
authorities. In respect of environmental laws/regulations, the inspection by
specially trained/designated/notified agencies for third party inspection shall
be considered to supplement the inspection by the Government agencies for
compliance monitoring.
iii) In respect of laws and regulations pertaining to environment, Central/State
Governments may delegate the power as allowed by the relevant statutes to
an official of the State Pollution Control Board (SPCB) posted in the zone. The
Environmental Clearances for NIMZ units under the EIA Notification, 2006
shall be considered on a high priority, and the units thereon will be exempted
from public hearing provided under the EIA Notification, 2006 in cases where
such estates have undergone public hearing as a whole. Further, facilitative
instructions and guidelines may be issued at the Central and State level from
time to time aiming at promotion of NIMZ investment while safeguarding
environmental integrity.
Page 9 of 31

iv) The entire process of clearances by Central and State authorities will be
progressively made web-enabled.
v) Timelines will be defined in respect of all clearances. In case the decision is
not taken in the specified timeline, the clearance will be ‘deemed’ to have
been given on expiry of timeline.
vi) A Combined Application Form and a Common Register will be developed as
far as practicable.
vii) Submission of multiple returns to different departments will be replaced by
one simplified Monthly/ Quarterly return wherever feasible.
2.4 Of all the statutory clearances for running the industry, the most significant
and important are the environment clearances and matters relating to labour welfare.
Major environmental aspects will be taken care of in the NIMZ in the beginning itself
by having an impact study while doing selection of the site and subsequently by
having proper zoning during Master Planning. The Exit Policy will be prepared
keeping in view the provisions for protection of workers’ rights within the statutory
framework. Mechanisms may be developed for cooperation of public or private
institutions with government inspection services under the overall control of statutory
authorities. Subject to setting up a suitable mechanism in concurrence with the
Ministry of Labour & Employment to enforce various labour laws, the appropriate
Government shall delegate the powers of inspection and enforcement to CEO of
SPV who shall be a senior Government official. The Government will conduct
periodic audit of the enforcement mechanism put in place to ensure compliance of all
labour welfare provisions.
Page 10 of 31

3. EXIT MECHANISM
Continuation of non-viable businesses leads to locking of funds and capital assets,
which can be more productively deployed for generation of higher output, incomes
and employment. An expeditious exit mechanism is therefore essential for
investments locked up in businesses. The National Manufacturing Policy seeks to
introduce policy measures to facilitate the expeditious redeployment of assets
belonging to non viable units, while giving full protection to the interests of the
employees.
3.1 Job Loss Policy
Under Section 25FFF of the Industrial Disputes Act there is a mandatory requirement
to pay compensation equivalent to fifteen days' average pay for every completed
year of continuous service, or any part thereof in excess of six months. Under the
Job Loss Policy, it is for firms operating in the NIMZs to insure workers against loss
of employment in the event of a unit requiring to close down, or to reduce the
workforce, due to financial constraints. This policy will be utilized for payment of
compensation to workers at the time of closure or right sizing of the company if
circumstances require them to do so.
The job loss policy will enable units to pay suitable worker compensation in the
eventuality of business losses/closure through insurance and thereby eliminate the
charge on the assets. This compensation may be equivalent to twenty days’
average pay for every completed year of continuous service or any part thereof in
excess of six months. SPV will facilitate companies to buy this insurance to meet the
statutory requirement of retrenchment compensation, at the stage of land allotment
at a premium determined by the SPV on the basis of competitive bidding. The
insurance policy will be purchased before start of operations. The premium for the
insurance will be paid upfront to create a safety net for the workers in the event of
job loss. The SPV will be responsible for monitoring this.
3.2 Sinking Fund
As an alternative to job loss policy, the SPV can opt for a sinking fund mechanism to
be funded by contributions as decided by the SPV. The terms and conditions for the
creation and operation of the fund will be notified by the Central Government /State
Governments. A certain minimum level of money commensurate with the expected
liabilities will at all times be maintained in the sinking fund. The fund shall be
continuously recouped in case money is drawn from the same. In case of the sinking
fund route also, the worker compensation may be equivalent to twenty days’ average
pay for every completed year of continuous service or any part thereof in excess of
six months.
3.3 Combination of the two mechanisms:
The SPV may opt either for a job loss policy or a sinking fund or a combination of the
two for example the SPV may buy a policy out of the sinking fund. The SPV can
evolve any other suitable option/arrangement also. The SPV will be responsible to
ensure that other statutory payments like EPF contribution and ESI are kept upto
Page 11 of 31

date. Subject to such arrangements being in place, to the satisfaction of
Government, the assets of any sick unit could be allowed to be redeployed by
freeing from the charge of the labour dues.
3.4. Asset Redeployment
The transfer of assets belonging to a firm which has been declared sick will be
facilitated by the SPV of the concerned NIMZ. Such facilitation will be part of the
contractual agreement between the SPV and the firm at the time of allotment of land
and shall be initiated by the SPV provided the concerned firm is able to provide a
‘Non- Encumbrance Certificate’ after clearing all the dues, including statutory dues,
to its creditors and to its employees. The mediation undertaken by the SPV will be
aimed at realising the best value for the assets which can then be re-deployed for
other productive purposes.
Similarly, the SPV will undertake the role of redeploying the labour of such units to
others in the NIMZ which have a shortage. This redeployment shall be from the date
of closure at the same remuneration and on the same terms and conditions of
service as applicable to him immediately before the closure (will require extension of
Section 25FFF(1A) to ‘manufacturing’. This section currently refers only to ‘mining’).
In case there is a time lag between the closure of the unit and redeployment of the
workers in another unit in the NIMZ, the compensation for the interim period will be
charged to the sinking fund or insurance as appropriate. The same shall be however
recouped through subscription from SPV members to ensure that a certain minimum
level as specified in para 3.2 is maintained.
3.5. Exemption from Capital Gains Tax
Relief from Capital Gains Tax on sale of plant and machinery of a unit located in a
NIMZ will be granted in case of re-investment of sale consideration within a period of
three years for purchase of new plant & machinery in any other unit located in the
same NIMZ or another NIMZ. This measure is proposed to encourage re-investment
of income generated from the disposal of assets (other than land) owned by a
company operating within the NIMZ, in the manufacturing sector.
Page 12 of 31

4. TECHNOLOGY ACQUISITION AND DEVELOPMENT
Technology development and upgradation is critical to attaining the stated objectives
of the Policy. Going up the technology ladder is the quickest way to become globally
competitive and ensure sustained growth of the manufacturing sector. This will
depend not just on development of indigenous technological expertise, but also on
the ability to make crucial technology acquisitions in the global market.
In today’s world, green technology is not a choice but an imperative for sustainable
development. Availability of affordable technologies has always been a constraint on
our manufacturing growth. Adoption and/or adaptation of these technologies entail
costs which are substantial especially for SMEs. Hence, there is a need for
supporting adoption of green technologies and resource conservation practices.
4.1 The National Manufacturing Policy will leverage the existing incentives/schemes
of the Government of India and also introduce new mechanisms to promote
green technologies.
4.1.1 This will necessitate specification of clear definitions/eligibility criteria for what
can be categorised as ‘Clean and Green’. The system for defining and
implementing Greener and Cleaner Technology shall be devised which would
address the following issues:
• Objective criteria will be prescribed by a Committee called the Green
Manufacturing Committee (GMAC) comprising representatives from the
concerned Ministries/Departments of the Central Government and relevant
sectoral experts from outside government. The criteria will be consistent with
the objective of the national action plan on climate change and the strategy for
inclusive sustainable development.
• The criteria will be reviewed by the Committee annually as technology is
dynamic and evolving constantly.
4.1.2 SPV of NIMZ will be enjoined with the responsibility of ensuring project
compliance with the above-mentioned criteria set-up by the Committee and also
put up the cases for incentives after due diligence. The onus of proving
‘cleaner’/’greener’/’energy efficient’ will be on the claimant subject to third party
certification by an agency/expert drawn from a panel approved by the GMAC.
The claimant will provide clear, objective information on the product/technology
throughout the lifecycle from manufacture to disposal. In case of industrial
areas/establishments located outside the NIMZ, the administrative body
established through relevant statutes of the Central/State Governments
shall perform the role of the SPV.
4.2 In order to promote acquisition and development of appropriate technology in the
country, the following measures are proposed:
(i) Technology Acquisition and Development Fund(TADF)
Page 13 of 31

A Technology Acquisition and Development Fund will be established for
acquisition of appropriate technologies including environment friendly
technologies; creation of a patent pool; and development of domestic
manufacturing of equipments used for controlling pollution and reducing energy
consumption. TADF will address these concerns across a broadbased set of
industries /sectors and it will be decided upfront for each sector as to how many
units with a specific technology in the particular sector will be supported
(a) SMEs will be given access to the patent pool and/or part reimbursement of
technology acquisition costs upto a maximum of Rs. 20 lakhs for the purpose
of acquiring appropriate technologies patented upto a maximum of 5 years
generally, prior to the date of submission of the project.
(b) Incentive for production of equipment/machines/devices for controlling
pollution, reducing energy consumption and for water conservation: The fund
will provide incentives for manufacturing/developing:
i. Equipment and/or technologies used to produce energy from the sun,
wind, geothermal and other renewable resources; clean coal technology;
creation and management of carbon sinks.
ii. Equipment used in energy-conservation technologies (including energy-
conserving lighting technologies and smart grid technologies).
iii. Equipment used to refine or blend renewable fuels.
iv. Fuel Cells, Micro-turbines or energy-storage systems for use with electric
or hybrid-electric motor vehicles.
These incentives shall consist of:
 Five percent interest reimbursement of the nominal interest charged
by lending agency;
 Ten percent capital subsidy.
(c) Operation, Monitoring and Review of the Fund will be done by the Green
Manufacturing Committee.
Page 14 of 31

4.3. Green Manufacturing – Incentives
i) Environmental Audit
Environmental audit will be Audit will be carried out by the industrial/institutional
mandatory for industrial and units through external auditors/firms drawn from an
institutional units in NIMZs approved panel of environmental auditors. The
panel as approved by the GMAC will be maintained
by the SPV.
25% grant to SMEs for expenditure incurred on audits
subject to a maximum of Rs.1 lakh and subject to
improvements/correctives effected. Third party
certification in this case will cover certification of the
corrective action.
The audit for each industrial/institutional unit will be
done as per applicable legislations and rules.
ii) Water Conservation
Water Audit will be (i)Audit will be carried out mandatorily by the
mandatory for industrial and industrial/institutional units through external
institutional units in NIMZ auditors/firms drawn from an approved panel of
environmental auditors. The panel as approved by
the GMAC will be maintained by the SPV.
25% grant to SMEs for expenditure incurred on
audits subject to maximum of Rs.1 lakh.
The water audit will be done as per applicable
legislations and rules
(ii)Exemption from water cess: Sec.16 of the Water
Cess (Amendment) Act, 2003, provides inter alia
that the Central Government may by notification
exempt any industry consuming water below the
quantity specified in the notification from the levy of
water cess.
iii) Wastewater treatment (i) Mandatory treatment of waste-water by every
industry as per CPCB and PCB norms.
(ii) Units practicing zero water discharge will be
eligible for 10% one time capital subsidy on the
relevant equipment/systems subject to actual
usage for one year and third party certification
(panel approved by GMAC).
(iii) Rebate on Water Cess to industries setting-up
wastewater recycling facilities as per Water Cess
Act, 1977.
iv) Rain Water Harvesting Will be compulsory for the developer, all industrial/
institutional units as per guidelines to be formulated
by the GMAC.
Page 15 of 31

v) Renewable Energy Appropriate incentives under the existing schemes of
Government of India and State Governments will be
available for specific projects.
vi) Green buildings All buildings (more than 2,000 sqm built up area) in
the NIMZ including industrial/institutional/
commercial/residential which obtain green rating
under the Indian Green Building Council
(IGBC/LEED) or GRIHA systems will be eligible for an
incentive of Rs.2 lakhs.
4.4. Compulsory licensing :
4.4.1 On occasion, a company may be unable to access the latest patented green
technology, which can substantially reduce its carbon footprint, because of its
inability to obtain a voluntary license from the patent holder. This could arise for two
reasons. First, the cost of obtaining such voluntary license could be a barrier for the
company. Second, the patent holder could be unwilling to part with the license, or it
is not available at reasonable rates or it is not being worked in India.
4.4.2 To address the first issue, the Technology Acquisition and Development Fund
will also function as an autonomous patent pool and licensing agency. It will
purchase Intellectual Property (IP) rights to inventions from patent holders. Any
company that wants to use the IP to produce or develop products can seek a license
from the pool against the payment of royalties. This company may then produce the
product for use in specified geographical areas subject to meeting agreed quality
standards. The TADF would reserve the right to license more than one company for
a particular patent.
4.4.3 To address the second issue, the Fund will have the option to approach the
Government for issue of a Compulsory License for the technology which is not being
provided by the patent holder at reasonable rates or is not being worked in India to
meet the domestic demand in a satisfactory manner. Such compulsory licenses will
be issued only within the provisions of TRIPS. Reasonable royalty will be paid to the
patent holder.
Page 16 of 31

5. INDUSTRIAL TRAINING & SKILL UPGRADATION MEASURES
It is estimated that between 2007-2017, 85 million persons will be added to the
labour force. The growth of total employment during this period, based on the
assumptions about employment elasticity and sectoral GDP growth rates, is
estimated at 116 million. With incremental job opportunities in agriculture being
negative, entire projected increase in workers will be accommodated in the
manufacturing and services sectors. Additional job opportunities in manufacturing
alone are estimated at 24.5 million during 2006-20171. All these jobs would require
sector and skill specific trained workforce. Since only 6% of the Indian workforce
receives any form of vocational training currently, there is a pronounced ‘skill gap’
both in terms of quality and quantity. Overall skill gap would be significantly larger
than the incremental workforce as even the existing workforce would need
retraining/skill specific training. Recognizing the urgency of interventions needed to
address both the qualitative and quantitative gaps in skill development, the National
Manufacturing Policy proposes to create a three tier structure for skill development,
namely:
i. Skill building among large number of minimally educated workforce;
ii. Relevant vocational and skill training through establishment of ITIs in PPP mode;
iii. Specialized skill development through establishment of Polytechnics;
iv. Establishment of Instructor’s Training Centre in each NIMZ.
5.1 Skill-building among the minimally educated workforce:
i. Skill-building in this segment would include ‘Farm to Work’, and ‘School to Work’
programmes targeted at the minimally educated workforce entering the non-
agricultural sector for the first time and seeking seasonal employment. This
group will be trained for low skill categories as loaders, cleaners, etc, as well as
for skills of basic operations on the factory shop-floor, basic machine
operations, and compliance with safety and quality requirements based on the
ability and aptitude of trainees and the area specific skill gaps identified. Skill-
building will also cover behavioural aspects pertaining to the urban-industrial
work culture — timeliness, reporting, and ability to work in an organized set-up.
ii. These will be demand driven short-term training courses based on Modular
Employable Skills (MES) prescribed by DGET. The courses will be of short
duration so that the opportunity cost of being away from productive work
opportunities during training period is minimised.
iii. Efforts of private sector companies/institutions, directly or through their non
profit arms, on skill upgradation, will be scaled up with appropriate incentives
and infrastructural support, through a mix of viability gap funding and weighted
deductions.
To encourage private sector to effectively participate in the skill development
initiative, the Government will provide a weighted standard deduction of 150%
1
Eleventh Five Year Plan 2007-2012- Volume I Inclusive Growth
Page 17 of 31

of the expenditure (other than land or building) incurred on Public Private
Partnership (PPP) projects for skill development in manufacturing sector in
separate facilities in coordination with NSDC.
iv. Training and course content in local languages will be ensured.
v. The apprenticeship concept is the most important intermediary step for
improving employability of the workers. There hardly exists any institutionalized
infrastructure which matches an apprenticeship candidate to an employer; an
employer to a candidate; and a trained apprentice to a job. The apprenticeship
programme will be remodelled so that it becomes effective on the job training
rather than mere compliance with the Act without any focus on the outcome. Its
scope will be widened to cover most sectors of the economy in consultation with
industry and industry associations. This remodelling of the apprenticeship
programme will be done by the Ministry of Labour and Employment.
vi.In a NIMZ, the SPV will undertake skill up gradation in co-ordination with the
National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC):
(a) Preference will be given to the local residents in the first five years of
operation and training will be extended to others only if all the available
seats are not filled up by the local residents.
(b) Independent certification and assessment by third party agencies
acceptable to the industry will be mandatory to ensure quality
standards and employment.
(c) The SPV and the service provider will undertake appropriate
awareness and publicity campaign in local electronic/print media and
organise meetings in different locations for mobilisation and selection
of trainees.
(d) Wherever necessary, boarding and lodging facilities will be provided to
the trainees by the SPV and service provider for trainees from the
remote locations. In other cases, trainees will be provided with to-and-
fro transport and food.
Page 18 of 31

5.2 Establishment of ITIs: There are currently 8306 ITIs/ITCs (as on July 15,
2010) with a capacity of training 1.16 million persons per year. Though the 11th plan
already envisages setting up of 500 new ITIs in industrial clusters/SEZs and 1000
new ITIs in other areas based on demand via the PPP route, the overall availability
of training infrastructure will remain grossly inadequate. A study conducted by ICRA
Management Consulting Services Limited (IMaCS) for the National Skill
Development Corporation has identified a skill gap of 240 to 250 million persons
until 2022. Close to 90 million of the identified skill gaps is expected to be in the
manufacturing sector2. In line with the vision of the plan, a proposal outlining the
details of expanding the existing training infrastructure is as below:
i. As in section 5.1(iii), to encourage the private sector to set up their own
institutions, the government will provide weighted standard deduction of 150%
of the expenditure (other than land or building) incurred on Public Private
Partnership (PPP) project for skill development in the ITIs in manufacturing
sector in separate facilities in coordination with NSDC.
ii. Companies will be enabled to utilize the existing facilities of ITIs/ITCs for
conducting evening courses. This will also reduce the initial capital cost on
setting up of the institutions.
iii. The training modules and materials for most of the trades have become
outdated and are not in line with the needs of the industry. Industry will be
involved in developing training modules and developing benchmarks for
assessments to evaluate skills, in classrooms, on-the-job training or internships.
Development of training modules will be a continuous process and skill sets
provided will be fully marketable.
iv. In a NIMZ, the SPV will be mandated to establish an ITI under the existing rules,
on Build, Own and Operate (BOO) basis.
(a) The SPV will assess the critical elements that determine the financial
viability of the ITI, viz: identification of skill gaps and assessment of
course/ training requirements, infrastructure for training and capital costs,
technical parameters, quality to be maintained etc.
(b) These parameters will be clearly stated in the Request for Proposal to be
published by the SPV. Qualified service providers (SPs) can then submit
their proposal to the SPV for appraisal stating the user charge they will
levy for providing the required services.
(c) For the development of the ITI in the NIMZ the SPV will enter into a
contract with selected service providers (SPs). The terms of the contract
for every NIMZ may vary according to specific requirements of each
NIMZ.
(d) The ITI developed by SPV in NIMZ in itself may have only limited physical
infrastructure to reduce capital costs, and specific job-based training may
be imparted on the shop floor of the industries involved, or by specialized
agencies contracted by the industry.
2
Presentation by National Skill Development Corporation to the National Skill Development Coordination Board on
September 15, 2010.
Page 19 of 31

(e) The curriculum will be shaped by the industry representatives belonging to
the NIMZ in accordance with the DGET norms. The trades and the
curricula will be dynamic in nature and determined by the requirements of
the industries so that the courses are job-oriented.
(f) The institute may be started with a few trades which have got immediate
potential of employment but will have enough space for future expansion.
This may require a system of standards and specification which can be a
part of the contract with the SPV.
(g) The ITI will also be available for skill upgradation of existing workers.
(h) The ITI will be accredited with the Directorate General of Employment and
Training.
v. Each ITI irrespective of its area of operation will have a placement cell to
coordinate placement of trained workers. Cost of placement cells will be
provided by Central Government for first five years.
5.3 Establishment of Polytechnics: Initiatives in this area would include setting up
of institutes of specialized learning such as a specialized Polytechnic for the
automobile sector, or a Polytechnic focused on high-tech manufacturing and semi-
conductors for the electronics sector, or one that fosters innovation and product
development in the IT/ITES sector. These institutes will be a crucible for specialized
skills in the workforce as well as for upgrading skills in the existing workforce.
Central Government will give Viability Gap Funding for setting up of these
polytechnics covering the capital cost as per the VGF guidelines of the Ministry of
Finance. Such funding will also be available to SPV in NIMZ. The mode of
operationalization will be the same as discussed above for ITIs. Accreditation will be
done as per the existing norms of the government.
Page 20 of 31

6. SMALL & MEDIUM ENTERPRISES
The Small and Medium Enterprises (SME) contribute significantly to the
manufacturing output, employment and exports of the country. It is estimated that, in
terms of value, the sector accounts for about 45 per cent of the manufacturing output
and 40 per cent of the total exports of the country. The sector is estimated to employ
about 59 million persons in over 26 million units throughout the country. Further, this
sector has consistently registered a higher growth rate than the rest of the industrial
sector. There are over 6000 products, ranging from traditional to high-tech items,
which are being manufactured by the SMEs in India. The MSME sector provides the
maximum opportunities for both self-employment and jobs after agriculture sector.3
6.1 Access to Finance
One of the major challenges faced by SMEs is inadequate access to adequate and
timely finance, mainly due to lack of financial information and non-formal business
practices. They are largely dependent on promoters’ resources and loans from
financial institutions and banks.
• Capital Markets: are difficult to access, due to high costs, difficulties in complying
with regulatory requirements etc.
• Promoters’ equity: by its very nature, can provide only limited access to funding.
• Bank finances: access is limited, due to the inability of SMEs to create tangible
assets, as also the debt-equity ratio norms followed by banks. Inadequate capital
infusion, resulting in denial of adequate bank finance, is one of the basic reasons
of sickness in such units.
• Venture Capital/ Private Equity Funds: First generation entrepreneurs, investing
in SMEs, have also found access to VC funds difficult, despite the Venture Capital
(VC) and Private Equity (PE) market having grown considerably in India. As per
industry sources, there are over 250 VC/PE firms operating in India and the total
private equity investments in the calendar year 2010, until September, 2010, stood
at $7.18 billion. However, VC/PE firms exhibit a marked preference to invest in
medium and large sized firms. The reasons for this include greater costs of
monitoring of SME units, non-formal operating structures, inadequate levels of
disclosure, etc.
6.2 Policy proposals for improving access to finance for SMEs in the
manufacturing sector
i. Rollover relief from long term Capital Gains Tax to individuals on sale
of a residential property (house or plot of land) in case of re-investment
of sale consideration in the equity of a new start-up SME company in
the manufacturing sector for the purchase of new plant and machinery.
This would enable a large number of entrepreneurs to raise equity by
3
Annual Report, Ministry of MSME, 2009-10
Page 21 of 31

selling of ancestral properties and to raise the level of investments in
the SMEs in the manufacturing sector, apart from boosting
employment.
ii. Tax pass-through status for Venture Capital Funds with a focus on
SMEs in the manufacturing sector. These VCFs will be required to be
registered under the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Venture
Capital Funds) Regulations 1996 and appropriately notified under the
Income Tax Act.
iii. Liberalization of RBI norms for banks investing in Venture Capital
Funds with a focus on SMEs in the manufacturing sector, will be taken
up in consultation with RBI.
iv. Liberalization of IRDA guidelines to provide for investments by
insurance companies in Venture Capital Funds with a focus on SMEs
in the manufacturing sector, will be taken up in consultation with IRDA.
v. Setting up of a stock exchange for SMEs and implementation of SEBI’s
‘framework for recognition and supervision of stock exchanges/
platforms of stock exchanges for SMEs”, which is expected to boost
the access of VC funds to small and medium enterprises.
vi. Implementation of the recommendations made by the ‘Task Force on
Micro Small and Medium Enterprises (MSME)’, presented to the Prime
Minister on 31 January, 2010, including:
 the creation of a separate fund with the Small Industries Development
Bank of India (SIDBI) using the shortfalls against MSE credit targets for
commercial banks
 strengthening of the National Small Industries Corporation (NSIC)
equity base, to give the demand side impetus to MSME enterprises.
vii. Easier access to bank finance through appropriate bank lending norms,
to be arrived at in consultation with RBI, to cater specifically to the
MSME sector and early stage business units. This would involve a shift
of lending focus from tangible assets to other kinds of assets.
viii. Inclusion of lending to SMEs engaged in manufacturing as part of
‘priority sector’ lending will be considered depending on the
recommendations of the Committee set up to look into priority sector
lending .
6.3 Service entity for collection and payment of statutory dues of SMEs
The compliance burden of laws and regulations is particularly severe on SMEs. By
their very nature, SMEs have limited manpower and resources which could be used
more fruitfully in production activities if there is a mechanism to take care of the
statutory compliances. For instance, there are a number of payouts which a
company has to make under the EPF Act; Employees Pension Scheme; ESI Act;
Payment of Gratuity Act; Personal Injuries Act; Workman’s Compensation Act; etc. It
is proposed that the setting up of one or more service organizations will be
Page 22 of 31

considered to undertake the responsibility of collecting dues from the companies and
making the necessary payouts in return for a charge linked to the wage bill of the
company. If this role can be played by an insurance company, the exit mechanism
as envisaged in Chapter 3 can also be part of the functions of this organization.
Such an organization(s) can be licensed by the Government and the industry will
have the option to use the services of such licensed organisation. The statutory
liabilities under the laws would however be of the companies themselves.
Page 23 of 31

7. SPECIAL FOCUS SECTORS
7.1 While the proposals in this policy paper are sector neutral, it is proposed to
identify special focus sectors where India can be cost competitive and which would
generate maximum employment. These sectors would need sector specific policy
interventions. Some of these sector specific policy interventions are already in
place. Their efficacy would need to be examined and wherever necessary additional
measures would need to be introduced. The priority sectors as identified in the
Planning Commission and NMCC papers are:-
a) Employment intensive industries like textiles and garments; leather and
footwear; gems and jewellery; and food processing.
b) Capital goods like machine tools; heavy electronic equipment; heavy
transport, earth moving and mining equipment; high technology equipment
like telecom, power, ICT and electronic hardware.
c) Strategic industries like aerospace; shipping; IT and electronic hardware;
renewable energy; solar, wind etc; defence equipment.
d) Industries where India enjoys a comparative advantage like automotive;
pharmaceuticals.
7.2 UNIDO has identified textiles; chemicals; basic metals; machinery and
equipment and electrical machinery, as sectors in which India leads among
developing countries.
7.3 This is an illustrative list of sectors which could be amended from time to time
in keeping with the evolving economic situation. Ministries/Departments dealing with
these sectors would need to come out with specific policy interventions to ensure
that Indian industry is cost competitive viz-a-viz the other major players in those
fields.
Page 24 of 31

8. LEVERAGING INFRASTRUCTURE DEFICIT
AND GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT
8.1 Government procurement is a major policy instrument for strengthening
manufacturing industry and development of technological competence.
Historically many countries have used it in their path to development. Some
countries have resorted to it in response to the recent economic crisis.
8.2 Government procurement with stipulation of local value addition will be used
in areas where we can club Government procurement needs over a number
of years to create the volumes and scales which would enable the
development of domestic manufacturing capabilities; in particular, capabilities
in critical technological areas like LED, solar energy equipment, IT hardware
and IT based security systems and fuel efficient transport equipment such as
hybrid and electric automobiles.
8.3 Similar steps will be taken in respect of the infrastructure sectors where
government agencies are importing equipment to a large extent. The
infrastructure deficit and requirement of equipment in each area viz power;
roads and highways; railways; aviation; and ports can be assessed over a
number of years to create the volumes and scales which would enable the
development of domestic manufacturing capabilities in these areas as well.
On the basis of a very rough calculation, it can be said that if the infrastructure
deficit is leveraged to the extent of the required equipment, the manufacturing
sector growth could be enhanced by close to 3 percentage points per annum
which is a substantial increase.
8.4 All contracts for purchase of equipment/products by government agencies for
governmental purposes, in areas such as those illustrated in paras 8.2 and
8.3 will be required to contain provisions for local value addition.
8.5 Purchase preference for green products will be given in Government
procurement contracts as appropriate. The criteria and procedures will be as
in paras 4.1.1 and 4.1.2.
Page 25 of 31

9. CLUSTERING AND AGGREGATION: NATIONAL
INVESTMENT AND MANUFACTURING ZONES
The National Investment and Manufacturing Zones (NIMZs) will be developed as
integrated industrial townships with state-of-the art infrastructure and land use on the
basis of zoning; clean and energy efficient technology; necessary social
infrastructure; skill development facilities, etc., to provide a productive environment
to persons transitioning from the primary sector to the secondary and tertiary
sectors. These NIMZs would be managed by SPVs which would ensure master
planning of the Zone; pre-clearances for setting up the industrial units to be located
within the zone and undertake such other functions as specified in the various
sections of this policy. To enable the NIMZ to function as a self governing and
autonomous body, it will be declared by the State Government as an Industrial
Township under Art 243 Q(c) of the Constitution. In sum, the NIMZs would be large
areas of developed land, with the requisite eco-system for promoting world class
manufacturing activity. They would be different from SEZs in terms of size, level of
infrastructure planning, and governance structures related to regulatory procedures
and exit policies.
9.1 Land for NIMZs
(a) Size of land for NIMZ – An NIMZ would have an area of at least 5000
hectares in size.
(b) Availability of land- The State Government will be responsible for selection
of land suitable for development of the NIMZ including land acquisition if
necessary. The land may constitute:
i. Government owned land;
ii. Private lands falling within the proposed NIMZ, to be acquired by the State
Government;
iii. Land under existing industrial areas/estates/sick and defunct units including
PSUs.
Guiding principles- Following guiding principles will be applied by the State
Government for the purpose:
i. Preferably in waste lands; infertile and dry lands not suitable for cultivation;
ii. Use of agricultural land to the minimum;
iii. All acquisition proceedings to specify a viable resettlement and rehabilitation
plan;
iv. Reasonable access to basic resources like water;
v. It should not be within any ecologically sensitive area or closer than the
minimum distance specified for such an area.
(c) Ownership – It is left to the State Government to adopt a model that it
considers most workable. It may:
i) Keep the ownership with state government itself;
ii) transfer the ownership to a state government undertaking;
iii) Have joint ownership with a private partner;
Page 26 of 31

iv) Adopt any other appropriate model.
(d) Irrespective of the model adopted, the state government will ensure that the
land can be mortgaged by the prospective allottees for securing financial
assistance from banks/FIs.
(e) After identification of the land, it will be the responsibility of the state
government to get the environmental impact study conducted for a
prospective NIMZ. DIPP in consultation with Ministry of Environment &
Forests will notify designated agencies for conducting the study.
(f) At least 30% of the total land area proposed for the NIMZ will be utilized for
location of manufacturing units. The states may reserve a certain
percentage of the land as appropriate, in a zone, for MSMEs.
(g) The State Government will bear the cost of the resettlement & rehabilitation
package for the owners of acquired lands, if any. An arrangement to recover
the costs could be put in place in collaboration with the SPV.
9.2 Administrative Structure for NIMZs
The administrative structure of NIMZ will comprise of a Special Purpose Vehicle, a
developer, State Government and the Central Government.
9.2.1Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV):
The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, notify an NIMZ.
An SPV will be constituted to exercise the powers conferred on, and discharge the
functions assigned to it under this Policy to manage the affairs of the NIMZ. Every
SPV shall be a legal entity by the name of the NIMZ. This SPV can be a company,
including a Section 25 company depending upon the MOU between stakeholders.
9.2.2Constitution of SPV
Keeping in view the financial participation of different stakeholders (govt., public
sector or private participants), an appropriate financial and administrative structure of
the SPV will be agreed to among different stakeholders giving due representation to
nominees of different stakeholders on the Board of SPV. The CEO of the SPV will
be a senior Central/State government official. The SPV will include an official/expert
conversant with the work relating to pollution control/environmental protection.
There shall be a provision to have a suitable representation of the allottees and
subsequently the industrial units.
9.2.3 Functions of SPV
Each SPV will undertake such tasks/measures as it thinks fit for the development,
growth, operation and management of the NIMZ. These tasks/measures will include:
1. Master planning of the Zone.
2. Preparation of a strategy for development of the Zone and an action plan for
self regulation to serve the purpose of the policy. These shall be submitted to
the Board of Approval.
3. Selection of Developer/Co-developers for the development and maintenance
of infrastructure internal to the NIMZ;
4. Formulation of rules and procedures for development, operation, regulation
and management of the NIMZ;
Page 27 of 31

5. Enforcement of the above rules and Master Plan;
6. Obtaining prior environmental clearance under the provisions of EIA
Notification 2006, if the area is more than 500 ha and the clearances under
the Air and Water Act as applicable to an individual unit, which clearances
would be expedited/facilitated by SPV.
7. Working out an arrangement with the State Government regarding revenue
streams including levy of user or service charges or fees or rent for the use of
infrastructure/properties in the NIMZ and creation of specific mechanisms for
specialized services. As far as possible, land to manufacturing industry will
be provided on land cost plus development charge basis with the option of
payment in installments. Workers’ housing will be provided at reasonable
rates with cross subsidization from high end residential/commercial areas, if
necessary.
8. Promotion of investment, both foreign and domestic, into the NIMZ;
9. Implementation of Resettlement & Rehabilitation package;
10. Any other function as may be decided mutually between state government
and other stakeholders.
9.3. Developer
SPV can take up the work of development on its own through various
agencies/contractors or take up the development in partnership with a developer
who shall be selected through a transparent process. Development can be in
stages.
9.4. State Government:
9.4.1 Water Requirement
In keeping with the overall master plan, the SPV will work out the requirement of
water both for industrial and housing activities. The state government, as far as
possible, will allocate surface water from sources from which it would be viable to
draw water for the NIMZ. The NIMZ would be enabled to have/own facilities for
tapping/extraction, treatment and distribution of water. There should be a long term
agreement with SPV on water rate payable on raw water linked to WPI or any other
suitable index.
9.4.2 Power connectivity- The generation, transmission and distribution of
electricity in NIMZ will be facilitated as follows:
i. State Government will facilitate the creation of captive power plants by Private
Players (including the SPV of the NIMZ) with full authority for generation,
transmission and distribution. The units will also be allowed to seek open access
as per the regulations of the State Electricity Regulatory Commission;
ii. The SPV or its agent, for the NIMZ shall be deemed to have license to supply
electricity and develop the distribution network for the same and shall be
deemed to be a licensee under section 14 of Electricity Act, 2003;
iii. The SPV or its agent will have an option to purchase electricity for NIMZ from
any State Electricity Company/Corporation or any other generator of electricity
including Central PSU.
Page 28 of 31

9.4.3 Infrastructure linkages -
The State Government, applying for NIMZ, will ensure that after notifying the area, all
physical infrastructure and utilities linkages under its jurisdiction are provided within
one year from the date of notification failing which the NIMZ may be denotified.
9.4.4 Any other functions as mentioned in specific sections of this policy.
9.5. Central Government: The Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion will
act as the nodal agency for the central government in matters pertaining to the
NIMZs.
The application for setting-up of NIMZ will be forwarded by the state to the DIPP for
approval. DIPP will constitute a Board of Approval, which will consider all
applications for establishment of NIMZs and approve such proposals as are found
feasible. Each NIMZ will be notified separately by DIPP.
In case an amendment is required to the concept and design of the project, as
encapsulated in the preliminary project report submitted by the State Government,
the same will be considered by the Board of Approval.
9.5.1Role:
i. The Central Government will bear the cost of master planning for the NIMZ;
ii. The Central Government will improve/provide external physical infrastructure
linkages to the NIMZs including Rail, Road (National Highways), Ports, Airports,
and Telecom, in a time bound manner. This infrastructure will be
created/upgraded through Public Private Partnerships to the extent possible.
Viability Gap Funding through existing schemes will be provided. Wherever
necessary, requisite budgetary provisions for creation of these linkages will also
be made;
iii. The Central Government through its institutions and schemes will provide
institutional infrastructure for productivity, quality (testing facilities etc.) and
design capabilities, encouraging innovation and skill development within the
NIMZ;
iv. The Central Government will undertake, along with the State Government
concerned, the promotion of domestic as well as global investments in NIMZs;
v. Any other role as mentioned in specific sections of this policy.
9.6. Funding of internal infrastructure in an NIMZ
Infrastructure development in an NIMZ would require large investments which cannot
be drawn solely from public financing. Such projects have long gestation periods and
substantial lead time before income streams commence. While latent demand may
exist for the zone, its actual materialization will take place only when the
infrastructure projects have been implemented and technical tie-ups have been
made. It is envisaged that the infrastructure development of the zone will in a large
number of cases be undertaken by private developers. Given the afore-stated nature
of this activity, there is a need to provide appropriate financial support/incentives to
the developers.
9.6.1 For this purpose:
Page 29 of 31

i) Viability Gap Funding (VGF): Under the Ministry of Finance ‘Scheme for Support to
Public Private Partnerships in Infrastructure’ in the form of capital grant at the
stage of project construction will be given as per the VGF guidelines. The total
Viability Gap Funding under this scheme shall not exceed twenty percent of the
total project cost. Additionally, the State Government or its agencies may also
provide funding out of their budget as may be feasible.
ii) Long term soft loans from multilateral financial institutions: Soft loans from
multilateral institutions will be explored for funding infrastructure development in
NIMZ. Assistance would be provided for negotiating non-sovereign multilateral
loans by providing back-to-back support, if necessary.
iii) External Commercial Borrowings: The developers of NIMZs will be allowed to
raise ECBs for developing the internal infrastructure of the NIMZs.
Page 30 of 31

10. TRADE POLICY
10.1 Trade policy impacts significantly on the domestic production level and profile.
The import and export regime, whether tariffs or export promotion measures
constitute important policy instruments which shape a country’s production profile.
With increasing globalization and international engagement, it is critical that these
policy instruments be aligned carefully so that domestic manufacturing is not
adversely impacted.
10.2 Trade policy is no longer restricted to border measures. International trade
rules now encompass measures which are more internal to an economy than just
border measures, for example, public/government procurement. Government
procurement can be a significant domestic policy instrument by which industry can
be seeded/supported through local value addition requirements. This policy
proposes government procurement as a significant instrument. As such it needs to
be ensured that the available flexibilities are not diluted at this juncture when the
attempt is to strengthen the manufacturing sector.
10.3 The policy will take active measures to protect export of products and services
from India from border taxes or other border measures that may be imposed by
partner countries on the grounds of protection of environment including those related
to GHG emissions reduction.
10.4 NMCC will be authorized to examine and make recommendations on duty
structures and other measures to the extent that they impact the manufacturing
sector in order to ensure that changes therein do not adversely affect the
manufacturing sector.
…….
Page 31 of 31