मीरा कुमार सामाजिक न्याय और
MEIRA KUMAR अधिकाररता मंत्री
भारत सरकार
शास्त्त्री भवन, नई दिल्ऱी - ११०००१
MINISTER OF SOCIAL
JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
SHASTRI BHAWAN, NEW DELHI -
110001
10 February. 2006
FOREWORD
I feel honoured to release (he National Policy for Persons with Disabilities. The Constitution Of India ensures
equality, freedom, justice and dignity of all individuals and implicitly mandates an inclusive society for all
including persons with disabilities. In the recent years, there have been vast and positive changes in the
perception of the society towards persons with disabilities. Majority of persons with disabilities can lead a
better quality of life if they have equal opportunities and effective access to rehabilitation measures.
2. The policies of (he Government of India towards the welfare of persons with disabilities have been
reflected in the enactments, schemes and through Institutions established for development of manpower for
rehabilitation of persons with disabilities. However, the need for a comprehensive document on National
Policy for Persons with Disabilities was being fell for quite some lime.
3. I wish to Convey my sincere thanks to my colleagues and officers in the Ministries / Departments Of (he
Government of India, experts in the field of disability and Non-Governmental Organisations engaged in
welfare of persons with disabilities who have contributed extensively by providing their valuable suggestions
in bringing oui (he National Policy Document
4. I hope that all concerned Government. Non-Governmental Organisations and experts would take
necessary steps in implementation of the Policy to improve the quality of life of persons with disabilities.

No.3-1/1993-DD.III
Government of India
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment
National Policy for Persons with Disabilities
Introduction
The Constitution of India ensures equality, freedom, justice and dignity of all individuals and implicitly
mandates an inclusive society for all including persons with disabilities. In the recent years, there have been
vast and positive changes in the perception of the society towards persons with disabilities. It has been
realized that a majority of persons with disabilities can lead a better quality of life if they have equal
opportunities and effective access to rehabilitation measures.
2. According to the Census 2001, there are 2.19 crore persons with disabilities in India who constitute 2.13
percent of the total population. This includes persons with visual, hearing, speech, locomotor and mental
disabilities. Seventy five per cent of persons with disabilities live in rural areas, 49 per cent of disabled
population is literate and only 34 per cent are employed. The earlier emphasis on medical rehabilitation has
now been replaced by an emphasis on social rehabilitation. There has been an increasing recognition of
abilities of persons with disabilities and emphasis on mainstreaming them in the society based on their
capabilities. The Government of India has enacted three legislations for persons with disabilities viz.
i. Persons with Disability (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995,
which provides for education, employment, creation of barrier free environment, social security, etc.
ii. National Trust for Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple
Disability Act, 1999 has provisions for legal guardianship of the four categories and creation of
enabling environment for as much independent living as possible.
iii. Rehabilitation Council of India Act, 1992 deals with the development of manpower for providing
rehabilitation services.
3. In addition to the legal framework, extensive infrastructure has been developed. The following seven
national Institutes are working for development of manpower in different areas, namely,
 Institute for the Physically Handicapped, New Delhi.
 National Institute of Visually Handicapped, Dehradun
 National Institute for Orthopaedically Handicapped, Kolkata
 National Institute for Mentally Handicapped, Secunderabad.
 National Institute for Hearing Handicapped, Mumbai
 National Institute of Rehabilitation Training & Research, Cuttack.
 National Institute for Empowerment of Persons with Multiple Disabilities, Chennai.
4. There are five Composite Rehabilitation Centres, four Regional Rehabilitation Centres and 120 District
Disability Rehabilitation Centres (DDRCs) providing various kinds of rehabilitation services to persons
with disabilities. There are also several national institutions under the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
working in the field of rehabilitation, like National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences, Bangalore;
All India Institute of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Mumbai; All India Institute of Speech and Hearing,
Mysore; Central Institute of Psychiatry, Ranchi, etc. In addition, certain State Government institutions also
provide rehabilitation services. Besides, 250 private institutions conduct training courses for rehabilitation
professionals.

5. National Handicapped and Finance Development Corporation (NHFDC) has been providing loans on
concessional terms for undertaking self-employment ventures by the persons with disabilities through State
Channelizing Agencies.
6. Panchayati Raj Institutions at Village level, Intermediary level and District level have been entrusted with
the welfare of persons with disabilities.
7. India is a signatory to the Declaration on the Full Participation and Equality of People with Disabilities in
the Asia Pacific Region. India is also a signatory to the Biwako Millennium Framework for action towards an
inclusive, barrier free and rights based society. India is currently participating in the negotiations on the UN
Convention on Protection and Promotion of the Rights and Dignity of Persons with Disabilities.
National Policy Statement
8. The National Policy recognizes that Persons with Disabilities are valuable human resource for the country
and seeks to create an environment that provides them equal opportunities, protection of their rights and
full participation in society. The focus of the policy shall be on the following:
I. Prevention of Disabilities
9. Since disability, in a large number of cases, is preventable, there will be strong emphasis on prevention of
disabilities. Programme for prevention of diseases, which result in disability and the creation of awareness
regarding measures to be taken for prevention of disabilities during the period of pregnancy and thereafter
will be intensified and their coverage expanded.
II. Rehabilitation Measures
10. Rehabilitation measures can be classified into three distinct groups:
i. physical rehabilitation, which includes early detection and intervention, counseling & medical
interventions and provision of aids & appliances. It will also include the development of
rehabilitation professionals.
ii. educational rehabilitation including vocational education and
iii. economic rehabilitation for a dignified life in society.
II A. Physical Rehabilitation Strategies
(a) Early Detection and Intervention
11. Early detection of disability and intervention through drug or non-drug therapies helps in minimization of
impact of disability. Therefore, there will be emphasis on early detection and early intervention, and
necessary facilities will be created towards this end. Government will take measures to disseminate
information regarding availability of such facilities to the people especially in rural areas.
(b) Counseling & Medical Rehabilitation
12. Physical rehabilitation measures including counseling, strengthening capacities of persons with
disabilities and their families, physiotherapy, occupational therapy, psychotherapy, surgical correction and
intervention, vision assessment, vision stimulation, speech therapy, audiological rehabilitation and special
education shall be extended to cover all the districts in the country by active involvement and participation

of State Governments, local level institutions, NGOs including associations of parents and persons with
disabilities.
13. Currently, rehabilitation services are largely available in and around urban areas. Since seventy five
percent persons with disabilities live in rural areas, the services run by professionals will be extended to
cover uncovered and un-served areas. Privately owned rehabilitation service centres shall be regulated for
maintenance of minimum standards which shall be laid down.
14. To expand coverage in rural and unserved areas, new District Disability Rehabilitation Centres (DDRCs)
will be set up with support from the State Government.
15. The National Rural Health Mission through Accredited Social Health Activist (ASHA) addresses the health
needs of rural population, especially the vulnerable sections of society. The ASHA inter-alia will take care of
the comprehensive services to the persons with disabilities at the grass root level.
(c) Assistive Devices
16. The Government of India has been assisting persons with disabilities in procuring durable and
scientifically manufactured, modern aids and appliances of ISI standard that can promote their physical,
social and psychological independence by reducing the effect of disabilities.
17. Every year through National Institutes, State Governments, DDRCs and NGOs, persons with disabilities
are provided with devices such as prostheses and orthoses, tricycles, wheel chair, surgical footwear and
devices for activities of daily living, learning equipments (Braille writing equipments, Dictaphone, CD player/
tape recorder), low vision aids, special mobility aids like canes for blind, hearing aids, educational kits,
communication aids, assistive & alerting devices and devices suitable for the persons with mental
disabilities. The availability of devices will be expanded to cover uncovered and under-serviced areas.
18. Private, public and joint sector enterprises involved in the manufacture of high tech assistive devices for
persons with disabilities will be provided financial support by the public sector banks.
(d) Development of Rehabilitation Professionals
19. Human resource requirements for rehabilitation of persons with disabilities will be assessed and
development plan will be prepared so that the rehabilitation strategies do not suffer from lack of manpower.
II B. Education for Persons with Disabilities
20. Education is the most effective vehicle of social and economic empowerment. In keeping with the spirit
of the Article 21A of the Constitution guaranteeing education as a fundamental right and Section 26 of the
Persons with Disabilities Act, 1995, free and compulsory education has to be provided to all children with
disabilities up to the minimum age of 18 years. According to the Census, 2001, fifty-one percent persons
with disabilities are illiterate. This is a very large percentage. There is a need for mainstreaming of the
persons with disabilities in the general education system through Inclusive education.
21. Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) launched by the Government has the goal of eight years of elementary
schooling for all children including children with disabilities in the age group of 6-14 years by 2010. Children
with disabilities in the age group of 15-18 years are provided free education under Integrated Education for
Disabled Children (IEDC) Scheme.
22. Under SSA, a continuum of educational options, learning aids and tools, mobility assistance, support
services etc. are being made available to students with disabilities. This includes education through an open

learning system and open schools, alternative schooling, distance education, special schools, wherever
necessary home based education, itinerant teacher model, remedial teaching, part time classes, Community
Based Rehabilitation (CBR) and vocational education.
23. IEDC Scheme implemented through the State Governments, Autonomous Bodies and Voluntary
Organizations provides hundred percent financial assistance for various facilities like special teachers, books
and stationery, uniform, transport, readers allowance for the visually handicapped, hostel allowance,
equipment cost, removal/ modification of architectural barriers, financial assistance for purchase/ production
of instructional material, training of general teachers and equipment for resource rooms.
24. There will be concerted effort on the part of the Government to improve identification of children with
disabilities through regular surveys, their enrollment in appropriate schools and their continuation till they
successfully complete their education. The Government will endeavor to provide right kind of learning
material and books to the children with disabilities, suitably trained and sensitized teachers and schools
which are accessible and disabled friendly.
25. Government of India is providing scholarships to students with disabilities for pursuing studies at post
school level. Government will continue to support the scholarships and expand its coverage.
26. Facilities for technical and vocational education designed to inculcate and bolster skill development
suited to various types of productive activities by adaptation of the existing institutes or accelerated setting
up of institutes in un-served / underserved areas will be encouraged. NGOs will also be encouraged to
provide vocational training.
27. Persons with disabilities will be provided access to the Universities, technical institutions and other
institutions of higher learning to pursue higher and professional courses.
II C. Economic Rehabilitation of Persons with Disabilities
28. Economic rehabilitation of Persons with disabilities comprise of both wage employment in organized
sector and self-employment. Supporting structure of services by way of vocational rehabilitation centres and
vocational training centres will be developed to ensure that disabled persons in both urban and rural areas
have increased opportunities for productive and gainful employment. Strategies for economic empowerment
of persons with disabilities would be the following.
(i) Employment in Government Establishments
The PWD Act, 1995 provides for 3% reservation in employment in the establishments of Government of
India and Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) against identified posts. The status of reservation for
Government in various Ministries / Departments against identified posts in Group A, B, C & D is 3.07%,
4.41%, 3.76% and 3.18% respectively. In PSUs, the reservation status in Group A, B, C & D is 2.78%,
8.54%, 5.04% and 6.75%, respectively. Government will ensure reservation in identified posts in the
Government sector including public sector undertakings in accordance with the provisions of the PWD Act,
1995. The list (ii) Wage employment in Private sector
Development of appropriate skills in persons with disabilities will be encouraged for their employability in
private sector. Vocational rehabilitation and training Centres engaged in developing appropriate skills
amongst persons with disabilities keeping in view their potential and abilities will be encouraged to expand
their services. Considering rapid growth of employment opportunities in service sector, persons with
disabilities will be encouraged to undertake skill training suitable to the market requirement. Pro-active
measures like incentives, awards, tax exemptions etc. will be taken to encourage the employment of
persons with disabilities in the private sector.

(iii) Self-employment
Considering slow pace of growth in employment opportunities in the organized sector, self-employment of
persons with disabilities will be promoted. This will be done through vocational education and management
training. Further, the existing system of providing loans at softer terms from the NHFDC will be improved to
make it easily accessible with transparent and efficient procedures of processing. The Government will also
encourage self-employment by providing incentives, tax concessions, exemptions from duties, preferential
treatment for procurement of goods and services by the Government from the enterprises of persons with
disabilities, etc. Priority in financial support will be given to Self Help Groups formed by the persons with
disabilities.
of identified posts, which was notified in 2001, will be reviewed and updated.
III. Women with disabilities
29. According to Census-2001, there are 93.01 lakh women with disabilities, which constitute 42.46 percent
of total disabled population. Women with disabilities require protection against exploitation and abuse.
Special programmes will be developed for education, employment and providing of other rehabilitation
services to women with disabilities keeping in view their special needs. Special educational and vocation
training facilities will be setup. Programmes will be undertaken to rehabilitate abandoned disabled women/
girls by encouraging their adoption in families, support to house them and impart them training for gainful
employment skills. The Government will encourage the projects where representation of women with
disabilities is ensured at least to the extent of twenty five percent of total beneficiaries.
30. Steps shall be taken to provide short duration stay homes for women with disabilities, hostels for
working disabled women, and homes for aged disabled women.
31. It has been noted that women with disabilities have serious difficulty in looking after their children. The
Government will take up a programme to provide financial support to women with disabilities so that they
may hire services to look after their children. Such support will be limited to two children for a period not
exceeding two years.
IV. Children with Disabilities
32. Children with disabilities are the most vulnerable group and need special attention. The Government
would strive to: -
a. Ensure right to care, protection and security for children with disabilities;
b. Ensure the right to development with dignity and equality creating an enabling environment where
children can exercise their rights, enjoy equal opportunities and full participation in accordance with
various statutes.
c. Ensure inclusion and effective access to education, health, vocational training along with specialized
rehabilitation services to children with disabilities.
d. Ensure the right to development as well as recognition of special needs and of care, and protection
of children with severe disabilities.
V. Barrier-free environment
33. Barrier-free environment enables people with disabilities to move about safely and freely, and use the
facilities within the built environment. The goal of barrier free design is to provide an environment that
supports the independent functioning of individuals so that they can participate without assistance, in every

day activities. Therefore, to the maximum extent possible, buildings / places / transportation systems for
public use will be made barrier free.
VI. Issue of Disability Certificates
34. The Government of India has notified guidelines for evaluation of the disabilities and procedure for
certification. The Government will ensure that the persons with disabilities obtain the disability certificates
without any difficulty in the shortest possible time by adoption of simple, transparent and client-friendly
procedures.
VII. Social Security
35. Disabled persons, their families and care givers incur substantial additional expenditure for facilitating
activities of daily living, medical care, transportation, assistive devices, etc. Therefore, there is a need to
provide them social security by various means. Central Government has been providing tax relief to persons
with disabilities and their guardians. The State Governments / U.T. Administrations have been providing
unemployment allowance or disability pension. The State Governments will be encouraged to develop a
comprehensive social security policy for persons with disabilities.
36. Parents of severely disabled persons with autism, cerebral palsy, mental retardation and multiple
disabilities feel a sense of insecurity regarding the welfare of their wards after their death. National Trust for
persons with autism, cerebral palsy, mental retardation and multiple disabilities has been providing legal
guardians through Local Level Committee. They are also implementing the Supported Guardianship Scheme
to provide financial security to persons with the above-mentioned severe disabilities who are destitute and
abandoned by supporting the cost of guardianship. This scheme, which is presently implemented in a few
districts, shall be expanded to cover other areas in a phased manner.
VIII. Promotion of Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs)
37. The National Policy recognizes the NGO sector as a very important institutional mechanism to provide
affordable services to complement the endeavors of the Government. The NGO sector is a vibrant and
growing one. It has played a significant role in the provisions of services for persons with disabilities. Some
of the NGOs are also undertaking human resource development and research activities. Government has
also been actively involving them in policy formulation, planning, implementation, monitoring and has been
seeking their advice on various issues relating to persons with disabilities. Interaction with NGOs will be
enhanced on various disability issues regarding planning, policy formulation and implementation.
Networking, exchange of information and sharing of good practices amongst NGOs will be encouraged and
facilitated. The following programmes will be undertaken:-
i. A Directory of NGOs working in the field of disability will be prepared properly mapping them by
geographic regions along with their major activities. For NGOs supported by the Central / State
Governments, their resource position, both financial and manpower will also be reported. Disabled
persons organizations, family associations and advocacy groups of parents of disabled persons shall
also be covered in the directory identifying them separately.
ii. There are regional / State imbalances in the development of the NGO movement. Steps will be
taken to encourage and accord preference to NGOs working in the underserved and inaccessible
areas. Reputed NGOs shall also be encouraged to take up projects in such areas.
iii. NGOs will be encouraged to develop and adopt minimum standards, codes of conduct and ethics.
iv. NGOs will be provided opportunities for orientation and training of their human resource. Training in
management skill which is already being provided, will be strengthened. Transparency,
accountability, procedural simplification etc. will be guiding factors for improvement in the NGO-
Government partnership.

v. The NGOs shall be encouraged to mobilize their own resources to reduce the dependence on grants-
in-aid from the Government and also to improve the availability of funds in the sector. Tapering of
assistance in a schematic manner will also be considered so that the number of NGOs to be helped
within the available resources could be maximized. Towards this end, NGOs will be trained in
resource mobilization.
IX. Collection of regular information on Persons with Disabilities
38. There is a need for regular collection, compilation and analysis of data relating to socio-economic
conditions of persons with disabilities. The National Sample Survey Organization has been collecting
information on Socio-economic conditions of persons with disabilities on regular basis once in ten years since
1981. The Census has also started collection of information on persons with disabilities from the Census-
2001. The National Sample Survey Organization will have to collect the information on persons with
disabilities at least once in five years. The differences in the definitions adopted by the two agencies will be
reconciled.
39. A comprehensive web site for persons with disability will be created under the Ministry of Social Justice
& Empowerment. Organizations both in public and private sector will be encouraged to make their web sites
accessible to the visually impaired using Screen Reading Technologies.
X. Research
40. For improving the quality of life of persons with disabilities, research will be supported on their socio-
economic and cultural context, cause of disabilities, early childhood education methodologies, development
of user-friendly aids and appliances and all matters connected with disabilities which will significantly alter
the quality of their life and civil society's ability to respond to their concerns. Wherever persons with
disabilities are subjected to research interventions, their or their family member or caregiver's consent is
mandatory.
XI. Sports, Recreation and Cultural life
41. The contribution of sports for its therapeutic and community spirit is undeniable. Persons with disabilities
have right to access sports, recreation and cultural facilities. The Government will take necessary steps to
provide them opportunity for participation in various sports, recreation and cultural activities.
XII. Amendments to existing Acts dealing with the Persons with Disabilities
42. Ten years have passed since the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and
Full Participation) Act, 1995 came into operation. With the experience gained in the implementation of the
Act and developments in the disability sector, certain amendments to the Act have become necessary. These
amendments will be carried out in consultation with the stakeholders. RCI and National Trust Acts will also
be reviewed and if necessary, required amendments would be made.
Principal Areas of Intervention
I. Prevention, Early Detection and Intervention
43. In order to ensure prevention and early detection of disabilities, the following action will be taken:
i. National, regional and local programmes of immunization (for children as well as expectant
mothers), public health and sanitation will be expanded.

ii. Medical and para-medical personnel will be adequately trained and equipped for early detection of
disability amongst children.
iii. Training modules and facilities in disability prevention, early detection and intervention will be
developed for medical and para medical health functionaries and Anganwadi workers.
iv. Training programmes of postgraduate, undergraduate degree and diploma in medical education will
include modules on disability prevention, early detection and interventions.
v. Disability specific manuals for families having persons with disabilities will also be developed and
provided free of cost.
vi. Human resource development institutions will ensure that the personnel needed to provide support
services such as special education, clinical psychology, physiotherapy, occupational therapy,
audiology, speech pathology, vocational counseling & training and social work are available in
adequate numbers.
vii. The latest research findings in the field of genetics will be utilized appropriately to minimize
congenital disability including mental illness.
viii. Appropriate plan of action for limiting effects of disability and prevention of secondary disabilities
within the existing health delivery system will be evolved.
ix. Attention will be paid towards improving awareness of nutrition, health care and sanitation amongst
adolescent girls, expectant mothers and women in the reproductive period. Awareness programmes
for prevention will be built in at the school level and at the level of teacher's training courses.
x. Programmes will be undertaken for screening of children to identify at risk cases.
II. Programmes of Rehabilitation
44. Medical, educational and social rehabilitation programmes will be developed with the assistance of
medical and rehabilitation professionals and with the participation of persons with disabilities and their
families, legal guardians and communities. Convergence of Government programmes will be ensured and
the following specific measures will be taken:
i. State level centres for providing composite rehabilitation services including human resource
development, research and long term specialized rehabilitation will be set up.
ii. Community based Rehabilitation programmes shall be encouraged. Self help groups of persons with
disabilities and their family members/ caregivers shall be effectively involved in the process of
rehabilitation.
iii. Setting up of mental health care homes for severely mental ill persons will be encouraged under
district level Panchayati Raj institution with the involvement of NGOs. Alternatively, family support
groups will be encouraged to setup Custodial Care Institutions for persons with mental disabilities
without community and / or family support.
iv. Measures will also be taken to setup residential rehabilitation centres for providing vocational and
social skills training for persons with mental disabilities.
III. Human Resource Development
45. The manpower will be developed in the following areas -
i. Training of primary level workers both in health care and in community development comprising of
Anganwadi workers, Auxiliary Nurses (Midwifes) etc.
ii. Support for training and orientation of personnel of Government and NGOs providing services.
iii. Training and sensitization of community decision makers such as members of Panchayats, head of
families etc.

iv. Training and orientation of family members as caregivers.
46. Human resources will be trained to meet the requirement of education for children with disabilities under
inclusive education, special education, home-based education, pre-school education etc, The following
training programmes of different specialization and levels shall be developed:
i. Training modules for teachers for inclusive education.
ii. Diploma, degree and high level programmes in special education
iii. Training of caregivers for home-based education and care services for disabled adults/ senior
citizens etc.
47. Rehabilitation Council of India shall be the nodal agency for preparation of plans for training of
rehabilitation personnel. The role of the National Institutes in disability specific training will be clearly spelt
out and a five-year Plan of Action will be drawn up.
IV. Education of Persons with Disabilities
48. It will be ensured that every child with disability has access to appropriate pre-school, primary and
secondary level education by 2020. Special care will be taken to -
i. Make schools (building, approaches, toilets, playgrounds, laboratories, libraries etc.) barrier free
and accessible for all types of disability.
ii. Medium and method of teaching will be suitably adapted to the requirements of most disability
conditions.
iii. Technical / supplementary / specialized system of teaching / learning will be made available within
the school or at a common center easily accessible to a cluster of schools.
iv. Teaching / learning tools and aids such as educational toys, Braille / talking books, appropriate
software etc. will be made available. Incentives will be given to expand facilities for setting up of
general libraries, e-libraries, Braille-libraries and talking books libraries, resource rooms etc.
v. National Open School and distance learning programmes will be popularized and extended to other
parts in the country.
vi. Sign language, Alternative and Augmentative Communications (AAC) and other modes as a viable
medium in inter personal communication will be recognized, standardized and popularized.
vii. Schools will be located within easy traveling distance. Alternatively, viable travel arrangements will
be made with the assistance of the community, State and NGOs.
viii. Parent-Teacher counseling and grievance redressal system will be set up in the schools.
ix. There will be separate mechanism to review annually the intake and retention of the girl child with
disability at primary, secondary and higher levels of education.
x. Many children with disabilities, who cannot join inclusive education system, would continue to get
educational services from special schools. Special schools shall be appropriately re-modeled and re-
oriented based on technological development. These schools will also help prepare children with
disabilities to join mainstream inclusive education.
xi. In some cases due to the nature of disability (its type and degree), personal circumstances and
preferences, home-based education will be provided.
xii. Course curriculum and evaluation system for children with various disabilities shall be developed
keeping in view their capabilities. Examination system will be modified to make it disabled friendly
by exemptions such as learning mathematics, learning only one language, etc. Further, facilities like
extra time, use of calculators, use of Clarke's tables, scribes etc would be provided based on the
requirement.

xiii. Model Schools of Inclusive Education will be set up in each State / U.T to promote education of
persons with disabilities.
xiv. In the era of knowledge society, computers play very important role. Efforts will be made so that
every child with disability gets suitably exposed to the use of computers.
xv. Children with disabilities upto the age of 6 years will be identified and necessary interventions made
so that they are capable of joining inclusive education.
xvi. Educational facilities will be provided in psychosocial rehabilitation centres for mentally ill persons.
xvii. Many schools discourage enrollment of students on account of their disability due to lack of
awareness about the capabilities of disabled persons. Programmes will be taken for sensitization of
teachers, principals and other staff members in all schools.
xviii. Special Schools presently being supported by the Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment will
incrementally become resource centres for inclusive education. Ministry of Human Resource
Development shall open new special schools depending upon the requirement.
xix. Adult learning / leisure centers for adults with severe learning difficulties will be promoted.
xx. Three percent reservation for persons with disabilities in admission to higher educational institutions
shall be enforced. Universities, colleges and professional institutions will be provided financial
support to establish Disability Center to take care of educational needs of students with disabilities.
They will also be encouraged to make classrooms, hostels, cafeterias and other facilities in the
campus accessible to students with disabilities.
xxi. Include a module in induction and in-service training programmes of teachers on issues relating to
management of children with disabilities
49. The Ministry of Human Resource Development will be the nodal
Ministry to coordinate all matters relating to the education of persons
with disabilities.
V. Employment
50. The following steps will be taken for employment of persons with disabilities:
i. The government shall initiate a dialogue with private sector organizations to help persons with
disabilities in getting employment.
ii. Develop appropriate home-based income generation programmes for the persons with disabilities
especially for persons with severe and multiple disabilities, who opt for such programmes. The
system of coaching for employment will also be encouraged for persons with disabilities and their
caregivers.
iii. Facilitate modifications in the design of machinery, workstation and work environment necessary for
the disabled persons to operate without barriers in training centres / factories / industry / offices
etc.
iv. Provide assistance through appropriate agencies like Marketing Boards, District Rural Development
Agencies (DRDAs), private agencies and Non Governmental Organizations in marketing of goods
and services produced by persons with disabilities.
v. Coverage of persons with disabilities in poverty alleviation programmes will be improved so that
they get their due share of 3 percent as provided under statutory provisions.

VI. Barrier-free environment
51. For creation of barrier-free environment, the following strategies will be adopted:
(i) Public buildings (functional or recreational), transport amenities including roads, sub-ways and
pavements, railway platforms, bus-stops / terminals, ports, airports, modes of transports (bus, train, plane
and waterways), playgrounds, open space etc. will be made accessible.
(ii) Use of sign language in all public functions will be encouraged.
(iii) Modification of Curriculum of Architects and Civil engineers will be undertaken to include issues relating
to construction of barrier-free buildings. In service training will be provided on these issues to the
government architects and engineers.
(v) Full adoption of comprehensive building byelaws and space standards for barrier-free built environment
shall be ensured. Effort will be made to ensure adoption of the byelaws and space standards by all the
states, municipal bodies and Panchayati Raj institutions in the country. These authorities will ensure that all
newly constructed buildings for public use are barrier-free.
(vi) State Transport Undertakings will ensure disabled friendly features in their vehicles. Railways will
provide barrier-free coaches in a phased manner. They will also make the platforms-buildings, toilets and
other facilities barrier-free.
(vii) The Government will ensure that Industrial establishments, offices, public utilities both in public and
private sector provide disabled friendly work place for their employees. Safety standards will be developed
and strictly enforced.
(viii) Proactive steps will be taken to ensure disability-friendly IT environment in the country.
(ix) All the buildings, which are for public use, will be audited for its accessibility to persons with disability.
There may be a need to develop professionally recognized access auditors whose services would be utilized
for the purpose.
(x) Banking system will be encouraged to meet the needs to the persons with disabilities.
(xi) Communication needs of the persons with disabilities will be met by making information service and
public documents accessible. Braille, tape-service, large print and other appropriate technologies will be
used to provide information for the persons with visual disability.
VII. Social Protection
52. The following steps will be taken to provide adequate Social
Security to the persons with disabilities:-
i. A system of regular review of the policies of tax relief granted to the persons with disabilities will be
put in place so that necessary income tax and other tax relief remain available to persons with
disabilities.
ii. State Governments and UT Administrations will be encouraged to rationalize the amount of pension
and unemployment allowance for persons with disabilities.

iii. Life Insurance Corporation of India has been providing insurance cover to persons with specific type
of disabilities. There is a need to encourage all insurance agencies to cover persons with disabilities
without exception.
VIII. Research
53. Research for developing new technologies for persons with disabilities will be encouraged with
international cooperation, wherever necessary. Results of research will be widely disseminated. It will be
focused on the following aspects:-
i. Socio-cultural aspects of disability, which inter alia include study of social attitude and behavioral
patterns towards persons with disabilities.
ii. Develop social indicators relating to the education of persons with disabilities so as to analyze the
problems involved and take up programmes to improve access and opportunities
iii. Generate statistics about the employment status of persons by type of disability especially for those
who become disabled due to accidents and other disasters.
iv. Study causes of different types and level of incidence of disabilities
v. Genetic research to minimize incidence of disability under the aegis of Indian Council of Medical
Research
vi. Adaptive technology research focusing on enhanced personal mobility, verbal / non-verbal
communication, design changes in articles of every day usage etc. with a view to develop cost
effective, user-friendly and durable aids & appliances with the help of premier technological
institutes.
54. Ministry of Science & Technology shall set up Rehabilitation Technology Centre for coordinating and
undertaking research and development, testing and certifying technologies, training etc. Appropriate
hardware and software suitable for persons with disabilities to ensure access to information technologies will
be developed.
IX. Sports, Recreation and Cultural activities
55. The following steps will be taken to ensure equal opportunities for sports, recreation and cultural
activities: -
i. Make places for recreation, cultural activities and sports, hotels, beaches, sports arenas,
auditoriums, gym halls, etc. accessible.
ii. Travel agencies, hotels, voluntary organizations and others involved in organizing recreational
activities or travel opportunities should offer their services to all, taking into account the special
needs of persons with disabilities.
iii. Identification of talent amongst persons with disabilities in different sports shall be made with the
assistance of local NGOs.
iv. Formation of Sports organizations and Cultural societies for persons with disabilities will be
encouraged. There will be mechanism to support the participation of persons with disabilities in
national and international events.
v. A national award for excellence in sports for persons with disabilities shall be instituted.
vi. 56. The Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment will be the nodal Ministry to coordinate all
matters relating to the implementation of the Policy.
vii. 57. An inter-ministerial body to coordinate matters relating to implementation of National Policy will
be formed. All stakeholders including prominent NGOs, Disabled Peoples Organizations, advocacy
groups and family associations of parents / guardians, experts and professionals will also be

represented on this body. Similar arrangements will be encouraged at the State and Districts levels.
Panchayati Raj Institutions and Urban Local Bodies will be associated in the functioning of the
District Disability Rehabilitation Centres' District Level Committees to coordinate the matters
relating to the implementation of the policy.
viii. 58. The Ministries of Home Affairs, Health & Family Welfare, Rural Development, Urban
Development, Youth Affairs & Sports, Railways, Science & Technology, Statistics & Programme
Implementation, Labour, Panchayati Raj and Departments of Elementary Education & Literacy,
Secondary & Higher Education, Road Transport & Highways, Public Enterprises, Revenue, Women &
Child Development, Information Technology and Personnel & Training will setup necessary
mechanism for implementation of the policy. A five-year perspective Plan and annual plans setting
targets and financial allocations will be prepared by each Ministry / Department. The annual report
of these Ministries / Departments will indicate progress achieved during the year.
ix. 59. The Chief Commissioner for Disabilities at Central level and State Commissioners at the State
level shall play key role in implementation of National Policy, apart from their statutory
responsibilities.
x. 60. Panchayati Raj Institutions will play a crucial role in the implementation of the National Policy to
address local level issues and draw up suitable programmes, which will be integrated with the
district and State plans. These institutions will include disability related components in their
projects.
xi. 61. Infrastructure created during the course of implementation will be required to be maintained
and effectively used for a long period. The community should take a leading role in generating
resources with in themselves or through mobilization from private sector organizations to maintain
the infrastructure and also to meet the running cost. This step will not only reduce the burden on
state resources but will also create a greater sense of responsibility among the community and
private entrepreneurs.
xii. 62. Every five years a comprehensive review will be done on the implementation of the National
Policy. A document indicating status of implementation and a roadmap for five years shall be
prepared based on the deliberations in a national level convention. State Governments and Union
Territory administrations will be urged to take steps for drawing up State Policy and develop action
plan.

Painting by Ms Selvi N. Vidarthe. Winner of National Award for the Welfare of Persons with
Disabilities - 2005 in the category of Creative Individual