National Transit Oriented Development (TOD) Policy
1. Background
1.1. India is urbanizing at a rapid pace with urban population rising much faster than
its total population. Level of urbanisation has increased from 17.29% in 1951 to
31.6 % in 2011. India is competing with the fastest growing countries in the
world. The urban population in India, which is nearly 377 million is poised to
grow to 600 million by 2030. The urban population of India contributes 65% of
country’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP), which is expected to grow to 75% in the
next 15 years. With India witnessing a high economic growth, Indian cities are
growing at a rate faster than other cities in the world.
1.2. Urbanization has led to horizontal growth of the cities thus creating problems of
urban sprawl. This has resulted in increase of trip lengths and higher usage of
private vehicles, problems of pollution and increased demand of infrastructure.
To address these issues, many cities have strengthened their public transport by
developing mass rapid transit systems (MRTS) such as metro rails and Bus Rapid
Transit Systems (BRTS). It is however, important to efficiently use these systems
by integrating the land use with the transport infrastructure to make the cities
livable, healthy and smart.
2. What is Transit-Oriented Development (TOD)?
2.1. TOD integrates land use and transport planning and aims to develop planned
sustainable urban growth centers, having walkable and livable communes with
high density mixed land-use. Citizens have access to open green and public
spaces and at the same time transit facilities are efficiently utilized.
1

2.2. TOD focuses on creation of high density mixed land use development in the
influence zone of transit stations, i.e. within the walking distance of (500-800 m)
Figure 1: TOD along Transit Stations
transit station or along the corridor in case the station spacing is about 1km as
shown in Figure 1. TOD advocates pedestrian trips to access various facilities
such as shopping, entertainment and work.
2.3. TOD increases the accessibility of the transit stations by creating pedestrian and
Non-Motorised Transport (NMT) friendly infrastructure that benefits large
number of people, thereby increasing the ridership of the transit facility and
improving the economic and financial viability of the system. Since the transit
corridor has mixed land-use, where the transit stations are either origin (housing)
or destination (work), the corridor experiencing peak hour traffic in both
directions would optimize the use of the transit system.
3. Need for a National TOD Policy
3.1. As the cities are experiencing rapid growth, transit systems like metro rail, BRTS,
etc. are being implemented to cater to the growing travel demand. It has thus
become inevitable to have TOD for all such cities which have an existing mass
transit systems or are planning to do so.
3.2. It is the responsibility of the state government to manage the urban spaces,
however a National TOD policy would serve as guidelines and play a catalytic role
in formulating state/ city level policies for promotion of transit oriented
development
2

3.2.1. In this context, it is important for community-based organizations,
practitioner, urban local bodies, state/ union territory (UT)
governments, Central Government ministries/ departments/ agencies
and all other stakeholders involved in the development of the city, to
understand TOD, its benefits and implementation strategy.
3.2.2. National TOD policy shall be a guiding document for the Central
Government ministries/ departments/ agencies to ensure that their
schemes, policies, etc. encourage TOD in cities, especially those with
upcoming mass transit systems.
3.2.3. This shall support states and cities to recognize public transport
infrastructure as the core around which the future expansion of urban
areas should be planned and the investments in public transport be
directed accordingly.
3.2.4. This shall help all state/ UT governments and urban local bodies in
formulation of TOD planning strategies.
3.3. It shall help in the active participation of all stake holders, Government and Non-
Government organizations in implementing TOD.
4. Vision of TOD Policy
The vision of the policy is three fold:
4.1 Enable Transformation: to assist in transformation of cities from private vehicle
dependent city to public transport oriented development,
4.2 Accessible Public Transport: to promote the usage of public transport by making
it accessible, encourage green mobility by encouraging people to walk and cycle
and at the same time curb pollution and other negative impacts of motorization.
4.3 Compact Walkable Communities: to create livable and affordable communities,
which are compact and walkable.
3

5. Objectives of TOD Policy
TOD integrates land use and transport planning to develop compact growth centers
within the influence zone of 500-800 m on either side of the transit stations i.e. areas
within walking distance, to achieve the following objectives:
5.1. To promote the use of public transport by developing high density zones in the
influence area, which would increase the share of transit and walk trips made by
the residents/ workers to meet the daily needs and also result in reduction in
pollution and congestion in the influence area.
5.2. To provide all the basic needs of work/ job, shopping, public amenities,
entertainment in the influence zone with mixed land-use development which
would reduce the need for travel.
5.3. To establish a dense road network within the development area for safe and easy
movement and connectivity of NMT and pedestrians between various uses as
well as to transit stations.
5.4. To achieve reduction in the private vehicle ownership, traffic and associated
parking demand.
5.5. To develop inclusive habitat in the influence area so that the people dependent
on public transport can live in the livable communities within the walkable
distance of transit stations.
5.6. To integrate the Economically Weaker Sections (EWS) and affordable housing in
the influence zone by allocating a prescribed proportion of built-up area for them
in the total housing supply.
5.7. To provide all kinds of recreational/entertainment/ open spaces, required for a
good quality of life in the influence area.
5.8. To ensure development of safe society with special attention to safety of
women, children, senior citizen and differently abled by making necessary
amendments to the building bye laws.
4

5.9. To prevent urban sprawl by accommodating the growing population in a
compact area with access to the transit corridor, which would also consolidate
investments and bring down the infrastructure cost for development.
5.10. To reduce carbon footprints by shifting towards environmentally friendly travel
options for the line haul as well as for access and egress trips.
6. Principles of TOD:
TOD focuses on compact mixed use development around transit corridor such as metro
rail, BRTS etc. International examples have demonstrated that though transit system
facilitates transit oriented development, improving accessibility and creating walkable
communities is equally important. Based on the objectives of National Urban Transport
Policy, this TOD policy defines 12 Guiding Principles and 9 Supportive tools, as shown in
Figure 2 and 3, for realizing the objectives of TOD.
Figure 2: TOD Principles
5

Figure 3: TOD Support Principles Tools
7. Approach for TOD Implementation
7.1. Influence Zone
7.1.1. The area in the immediate vicinity of the transit station, i.e. within a
walking distance, having high density compact development with mixed
land use to support all basic needs of the residents is called the
influence zone of a transit station/ corridor.
Figure 4: TOD Influence Zone
6

7.1.2. Influence zone is either established at a transit stations or along the
transit corridors. It is generally up to a radius of nearly 500-800m of the
transit station. Where the distance between the transit stations is less
than 1 km and there is overlap in the influence area, it can be identified
as a delineated zone (around 500m) on either side of the transit
corridor within 10 - 12 minutes walking distance.
7.1.3. The area of influence, where the TOD is planned for implementation,
should be demarcated and notified through master plan and local area
plans before implementation. If in any case the TOD is to be
implemented in a phased manner, the influence area of the TOD can
also be notified in phases. The principles for delineating the influence
area should be clearly indicated so that there is no speculation or
confusion regarding the influence zone.
7.2. High Density Compact Development
7.2.1. TOD promotes densification in the influence area by providing higher
Floor Area Ratio (FAR)/ Floor Space Index (FSI) and higher population &
job density as compared to the area around and beyond the influence
areas. To ensure sustainable development, the minimum FAR should be
300 - 500%, and can be higher, depending on the city size. This will
promote higher concentration of people within the walking distances of
transit station, thereby increasing the ridership of the public transport
and resulting in increased fare revenue, pollution and congestion
reduction.
7.2.2. It is not necessary to keep the density and FAR norms consistent for the
influence areas across the city. It can vary depending on the
infrastructure available, land use zoning, transit capacity etc.
7

7.2.3. Cities should follow green building norms, adopt renewal sources of
energy such as solar and waste to energy options, adopt rain water
harvesting and ground water recharge techniques, which would
encourage water conservation, utilization of clean energy and promote
sustainable waste management so as to make them self-sustaining
through efficient use of resources and infrastructure.
7.3. Mixed Use Development
7.3.1. Mixed land use should be stipulated for development/ redevelopment
in the TOD zone as it would reduce the need for travel by providing
most of the activities such as shopping, entertainment and public
amenities such as schools, parks, playgrounds, hospitals etc. within the
walking distance of the residents. It would also improve the accessibility
of the transit facilities and at the same time link origins and
destinations, i.e. residences with work places or activity nodes. This
would ensure better utilization of transit fleet by distributing loads in
both directions, rather than creating unidirectional peak hour flows.
7.3.2. A blend of land-uses help in the optimization of physical infrastructure
and resources, as all components like roads, parking, water, sewerage
etc., remain functional at all times of the day.
7.3.3. The TOD benefits cannot be realized with the kind of developments that
encourage the use of personalized vehicles. It is therefore imperative to
restrict developments such as low-density housing, low-rise
development, warehouses, petrol pumps/CNG stations, cremation
ground and surface/Multilevel parking etc. in the influence area.
7.3.4. Mix of uses within the TOD can be achieved either by horizontal mixing
i.e. separate activities in separate plots/ buildings or vertical mixing i.e.
combining different activities within the same building.
8

7.3.5. To ascertain mixed use development along with the required street
network and open spaces, the minimum plot area in the influence zone
should be defined. The developer may, however, be permitted to
undertake construction in a phased manner. In case, the individual
landowners want to collaborate for development as per TOD norms,
necessary provisions may be made to facilitate it. The landowner(s) may
also be permitted to collaborate with developers in case they lack the
required experience and institutional & financial capacity to undertake
such development as per TOD norms. However, care needs to be taken
that the amalgamated plots are redesigned to allow finer network of
streets and dispersion of open spaces.
7.3.6. The mix of uses to be proposed shall be decided as per the local
conditions and the trends in real estate market, however, the minimum
percentage of built up area for housing, commercial and other
amenities should be fixed. The use of balance built up area may depend
on the prevailing market conditions and demand of the city.
7.4. Mandatory and Inclusive Housing
7.4.1. The cities should fix a minimum percentage (30% or higher) of allowed
FAR for affordable housing (for example up to 60 sq.mt. area) in all
development/redevelopment in the influence zones.
7.4.2. Housing in the influence zone should have a mix of all economic groups/
sections. The development control regulation should stipulate housing
for Economically Weaker Sections (EWS) as well as LIG/MIG, or other
types based on Census definition, in the influence area to give an
opportunity to the people who depend on public transport for daily
commuting to live in walkable neighborhoods.
7.4.3. The upper limit to the area of individual dwelling unit should be fixed as
a regulatory component in the influence zones to ensure housing for
LIG/MIG.
9

7.4.4. To ensure provision of EWS housing, a 10-15 percentage of built up area
in the influence zone should be defined. This could be ensured by
providing mandatory incentive of additional FAR for EWS housing. It
should also be ascertained that only low income families/ individuals
are provided ownership of these EWS units.
7.5. Multimodal Integration
7.5.1. The influence area should have high quality integrated multimodal
transport system for the optimum use of the facilities by the
residents/users. The system should have seamless physical connectivity,
information integration and fare integration across modes so that the
first and last mile connectivity does not become a bottleneck in the use
of public transit systems by the citizens.
7.5.2. The transit system, including its stations, should be designed to provide
high quality services that assure user satisfaction in terms of safety and
comfort. The citizens should have barrier free access to all the required
amenities in the transit system as well as around the transit centers.
7.5.3. The hierarchy of the facilities at the transit system should prioritize
pedestrians followed by bicycle, feeder buses, drop-off facilities and
park and ride facility in the given order.
7.5.4. The transit stations should have ample bicycle parking spaces with
scope for future expansion if need arises.
7.5.5. Intermediate Public Transport (IPT), Non-Motorized Transport (NMT)
and feeder buses perform a significant role in providing first and last
mile connectivity to the populace beyond the influence zone. To ensure
that the area around the transit station remain congestion free and to
facilitate easy transfers, it is important to provide adequate parking and
pickup/ drop-off facilities for the above modes at suitable locations at
the stations and in the influence zone.
10

7.5.6. To support TOD, park and ride facilities may be provided, if needed. The
facilities, with suitable pricing that deters private vehicle use, may be
planned primarily at the end stations and can variably decrease
according to the requirement on the intermediate nodes. On-street
parking should be prohibited in the influence area and if necessary it
should be priced higher than off street parking.
7.6. Focus on pedestrians, cyclists and NMT users
7.6.1. The streets should be designed for users of all age groups and for all
types of commuters including pedestrians, bicyclists, motorists and
transit riders. They should be safe and accessible by all.
7.6.2. The influence zone should have development in smaller blocks with a
finer street network having provision for pedestrians, bicyclists and
NMT users. This will create a grid of small, traversable blocks which has
sidewalks and amenities like lighting and information signage etc. and
ensure accessibility of the transit stations by pedestrians and cyclist.
7.6.3. Right of Way (ROW) should not dictate the pedestrian circulation
network, it should rather be designed based on the pedestrian volume
and adjoining land-use. Smaller ROWs should be made ‘pedestrian and
NMT only’ or one-way streets so that pedestrian circulation is not
compromised.
7.6.4. Continuous and unobstructed footpaths of suitable width should be
provided on either side of the streets. To protect the footpaths from
encroachment and parking, buffers or bollards etc. may be provided.
7.6.5. Universal Accessibility: All streets should be designed to meet or
exceed the minimum standards stipulated for barrier free environment
11

by Government of India1 to ensure universal accessibility for people
with reduced mobility including visually and hearing impaired persons.
7.6.6. Traffic Calming: To promote a safe and secure environment for
pedestrian and NMT users, necessary measures should be taken to
reduce speed as well as volume of motorized traffic in the influence
zone. On streets which are primarily designed for movement of
pedestrian and NMT as well as those having ROW less or equal to 12m,
the maximum speed limit should be restricted to 20 kmph by design by
use of table top crossings, carriage way surfaces etc. For all other
streets, in and around the influence zone, the speed should not exceed
40 kmph.
7.7. Street Oriented Buildings and Vibrant Public Spaces
7.7.1. Retail and other ‘active uses’ should be supported on the ground floor
along the main streets, key intersections, stations and parking garages
to ensure high quality pedestrian environments.
7.7.2. To promote natural surveillance of public spaces, all boundary walls and
setbacks should be removed and buildings should be permitted up to
the edge of the street. Also, the orientation of the buildings should be
such so as to face the pedestrian facilities.
7.7.3. The streets should have a natural surveillance system by providing
mixed-use active frontage, vending zones and avoiding opaque wall,
which would ensure a safe environment for pedestrians, especially
women, children and elderly.
7.7.4. Ground floor should support commercial activity, with at least 50% un-
tinted transparent frontage.
1 Guidelines and Space Standards for Barrier Free Built Environment for Disabled and Elderly
Persons, CPWD (1998) (http://cpwd.gov.in/Publication/ aged&disabled.PDF)
12

7.7.5. The height of compound wall, if present, should be transparent above
100 cm, with exception of high security government buildings.
7.7.6. The frontage of all parking structure/podiums or stilts on the ground
floor should support active frontage on all primary streets.
7.7.7. Street Vendors: TOD aims at inclusive development wherein all users of
the system are benefited. The street vendors are the eyes of the
streets; hence the designated spaces should be created for them while
designing the streets. However, care should be taken that the
integration does not have negative affect on their business.
7.7.8. Preserve Open Spaces: All open areas such as amenity spaces, green
spaces, playgrounds, parks and natural areas should be preserved as
part of TOD. The open space provision within TOD should meet the
Urban and Regional Development Plans Formulation and
Implementation (URDPFI)2 guideline of 10-12 sq.mt. per person.
7.7.9. Safety and Security: To ensure a safe and secure environment for
pedestrian and NMT users, especially women and children, the
influence zone should be designed to maximize natural surveillance. For
this purpose, street lighting should be provided, active frontage and
vendors zone etc. should be created. Further, facilities such a CCTV
cameras and panic buttons etc. should also be installed for round the
clock surveillance.
7.8. Managed Parking
7.8.1. To discourage the use of private vehicles and to manage parking in TOD,
it is essential that the supply of the parking is reduced and made
expensive within the influence zone.
2 http://moud.gov.in/link/urdpfi-guidelines.php
13

7.8.2. On-street parking should be prohibited within 100 m of the transit
station, except for freight delivery and pickup or drop-off of the
differently abled.
7.8.3. The use of parking spaces within the influence zone can be maximized
by sharing of spaces between uses that have demand during different
times of the day. For example parking requirements for office/work can
be shared with the parking spaces for residences as their hours for
demands do not coincide with each other.
7.8.4. TOD aims to promote NMT which includes use of bicycle. Therefore,
bicycle parking facilities should be provided at regular intervals and
suitable locations within the influence zone. Public bicycle sharing
systems may also be planned to promote the use of bicycles.
7.8.5. Parking should not be allowed in a manner wherein the aesthetics of
the city is lost. The neighborhood is generally adversely affected by
parking of vehicles in front of the buildings on the primary streets,
therefore, on-street parking should be avoided. In case, if on-street
parking is needed, it should be provided in a manner, wherein it acts as
a buffer for the pedestrians and cyclists from motorized traffic.
7.8.6. To restrict unauthorized parking and to avoid congestion caused due to
on-street parking, it is important to have an enforcement mechanism in
place. Cities should have a parking policy with heavy penalty for
unregulated parking in the influence zone and ensure that the same is
implemented. Also the parking should have price variations according
to time of day and duration of parking.
8. Value Capture Financing (VCF) for TOD
8.1. Value Capture is based on the principle that private land and buildings benefit
from public investments in infrastructure and policy decisions of the
Government. Part of the increment in value of land and building should be
14

captured to fund projects being set up for the public by the Central/ State
government and the ULBs. The additional value is generated by actions other
than the land owner’s direct investment. Land value capture is distinct from the
user charges or fees that agencies collect for providing services.
8.2. The investment in transit system as well as increase in FAR and provision for
mixed use development would result in increase in value of land within the
influence zone. Land Value Capture can be used as a mechanism to finance the
required upgradation of infrastructure and amenities within the influence zone
and expansion of the public transport system.
8.3. Value capture financing is an opportunity for the private sector because the
projects are planned for the overall development, thus increasing the value and
are also backed by the government.
8.4. In TOD influence zones, land value capture can be done through enhanced or
additional land value tax3 or one time betterment levy4, development charges or
impact fee5, transfer of development rights (TDRs)6, or other such mechanisms
which have been adopted in various states across the country and abroad.
8.5. The resources generated through various mechanism should be credited into a
TOD fund created for funding the infrastructure upgradation/ maintenance,
enhancement of viability of transit systems, development and maintenance of
transit corridor and public transport etc. within and beyond the influence zone.
The fund should be in the form of an escrow account, from which financing is
provided to various agencies for the identified activities and the balance can be
used by the ULBs for other development purposes such as public transport
expansion.
3 Examples – Tamil Nadu and Maharashtra
4 Example – Mumbai Metropoiltan Development Authority (MMRDA) Act 1974 provides for levying
betterment charges for specific projects. Hyderabad Municipal Corporation Act 1955 also provides
necessary provisions
5 Example - Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Madya Pradesh and Tamil Nadu
6 Example – Maharashtra, Karnataka and Gujarat
15

8.6. The real-estate market can be erratic and therefore caution should be observed
while estimating the revenue from land value capture. In case the revenues are
lower than expectations, ULBs should prepare alternate financing plans to
circumvent problems in implementing TOD.
9. Statutory Framework
9.1. TOD policy should be notified as part of the Master Plan/Development plan of
the city. The policy document should clearly outline the importance of the high
capacity transit networks in the city’s development.
9.2. The vision of the Master Plan/ Development Plan should be resonated by all the
stakeholders, especially those involved in infrastructure development and
preparation of development plans. The building bye-laws and development
control regulations would need to be amended to incorporate the changes
required for implementing TOD.
9.3. The influence zone of the TOD should be clearly notified by the concerned
authority (see para 5.1 on Influence Zone above).
9.4. To ensure that the infrastructure created in the influence zone is provided in a
planned manner, the ULBs and the concerned authorities/agencies should
prepare a comprehensive plan integrating all the utilities, physical infrastructure
and essential facilities such as roads, sewers, drainage, electric lines, green
spaces, police post, fire post, electric sub-stations, etc. The plan would be useful
to assess the carrying capacity of the existing infrastructure and the upgradation
needed to meet the increased demand once TOD is implemented.
10. Coordination and Implementation
10.1. Implementation of TOD would entail the involvement of various agencies for
preparation of master plans or sector plans, reviewing the infrastructure building
regulations, provision of public transport and traffic control, etc. Therefore, to
16

ensure the success of TOD, it is important that there is coordination between
these agencies for efficient planning and implementation. For this purpose, a
suitable institutional mechanism may be created in cities. An entity formed
jointly by the Urban Local Body and the Development Authority would be most
suitable for expeditious planning and implementation of the TOD; however, till
the time such a body is set up, city development authority could coordinate the
implementation. Adequate capacity building measures may also be taken by the
state governments and urban local bodies to familiarize the officials with the
tenets of TOD.
10.2. To ensure that TOD does not merely become a high density development along
the transit, which may result in higher concentration of private vehicles and
congestion, it is important that the ULBs make sure that all the important aspects
of TOD, as given in earlier sections, are implemented in totality.
10.3. Cities should provide transparency and clarity in the policy and procedures for
TOD, as well as the economic incentives for all stakeholders. This would allow
multiple landowner to come together and build a consensus and save time in
implementation of TOD.
10.4. For long term commitment of public agencies and private sector in implementing
TOD, cities should create clear and fair rules for sharing of costs, benefits, and
risk among the stakeholders.
10.5. Cities may encourage public private partnership in planning and implementation
of TOD as well as infrastructure upgradation to foster the technical knowhow
and financial capacity of the private sector.
11. Communications and Outreach
11.1. TOD, on wider board, needs the involvement of multiple agencies, both from the
private as well as the public sector. It is important for all stakeholders to have a
clear vision by which collective actions can be taken for successful
17

implementation of TOD. It is therefore essential to create awareness about TOD
as it would enhance the success of its implementation.
11.2. Cities may launch awareness program about the components of TOD, its
benefits, incentives to be reaped by the land owners, developers, infrastructure
agencies and other bodies, reduced per unit cost for creating and maintaining
infrastructure etc. and provide improved quality of life.
18