ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA

National Policy on Archaeological Exploration and Excavation
PREAMBLE

With the establishment of the Asiatic Society in Kolkata on 15 January 1784 under
the stewardship of Sir William Jones, field studies of antiquarian remains in India
were placed on a firm footing, In the ensuing 75 years scores of discoveries involving
cave and structural temples, Buddhist stupas and other monuments, and other
antiquarian remains were reported from the length and breadth of the subcontinent.
To be sure, all these discoveries were made by highly motivated amateurs, most of
them forming part of the colonial administrative set-up. Some of the more important
among these discoveries include the discovery of the Amaravati stupa and preparation
of what is regarded as the first site map in world archaeology by Colin Mackenzie in
1817, the recovery of Roman coins from several places in South India, the reporting of
megalithic tombs from the Malabar region by John Babington in 1823, the
decipherment of Brahmi and Kharosthi scripts by James Prinsep and others in 1830s,
James Fergusson’s pioneering surveys of ancient Indian temple architecture between
1827 and 1841 and Meadows Taylor’s systematic recording and excavation of
megalithic stone-circles in the Deccan in 1840’s using the method of stratigraphy.

Against the background of interest generated in archaeological sites and of the
need to protect them, the colonial government established the Archaeological
Department in 1861 and appointed General Alexander Cunningham as its Head
because he had already acquired first-hand knowledge of many important historical
sites of Northern India since 1930’s. Cunningham’s annual surveys of historical sites
of northern India for the next 20 years form the first major chapter in the history of
Indian archaeology and the reports on his discoveries, using the words of Lord Curzon,
still serve as ‘a noble mine of information’.

Likewise, during the same period the geologist Robert Bruce Foote reported
numerous Stone Age and other sites from southern India and laid strong foundations
for prehistory. At the same time pioneering discoveries of rock-art sites were made by
A.C, Carllyle in Mirzapur area.

The discovery of Mohenjo-Daro and Harappa and their excavations by John
Marshall and his Indian colleagues such as R.D. Banerji and D.R. Sahni in the first
quarter of 20t century not only brought to light a new Bronze Age civilization in the
Old World but introduced horizontal excavation in the Indian context. This work also
heralded the emergence of protohistory. Major exploration programmes were
undertaken by Aurel Stein, N.G. Majumdar and other workers.

During his four-year tenure (1944-48) as the Director General, Mortimer Wheeler
not only trained about 100 young workers from both government departments and
universities in scientific excavation in the field schools he conducted at Taxila but
adopted these methods in his own excavations at Arikamedu, Brahmagiri and
Harappa. During the pre-Independence period princely states like Mysore, Hyderabad
and Baroda and university departments at Pune and Kolkata also undertook in a
limited way excavations and explorations in their respective areas.

1|Page


In the post-Independence period the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) continued
its exploration and excavation programmes in prehistory, protohistory and historical
archaeology under the leadership of A. Ghosh, B.B. Lal, B.K. Thapar, M.N, Deshpande
and other senior archaeologists. Also a major salvage excavation was undertaken at
the early historical site of Nagarjunakonda in 1950s and expert field teams were
deputed to Egypt, West Asia and South-east Asia for assisting local archaeologists in
restoration work. University and State Departments also made very significant
contributions to field archaeology. H.D. Sankalia, G.R. Sharma and B. Subbarao are
some among the key figures from universities who shaped post-Independence
archaeology. Following R.N. Mehta’s Pioneering Work at Champaner, other sites such
as Viyayanagara (Hampi), Fatehpur Sikri, Daultabad and Lal Kot were excavated and
these placed medieval archaeology on a sound footing. Several foreign institutions also
undertook major field investigations in different parts of the country. The results of all
these excavations and explorations have been regularly reported in Indian Archaeology
— A Review and in some cases also published as independent reports (see list of major
sites in Annexure-A).

Explorations and Excavations still form the major research component of field
archaeology in India. These are guided by certain rules and regulations framed by the
Government from time to time, The following pages will briefly review the situation
and, wherever necessary, fresh guidelines will be recommended. Considering the fact
that archaeological sites are now under a serious threat due to developmental projects
of various kinds initiated by both governmental and non-governmental agencies,
priority areas will be suggested for future explorations and excavations.

2. LAWS AND REGULATIONS

Illegal diggings for treasure hunting and destruction of archaeological sites and
remains attracted attention of the Government from early times. Bengal Regulations
XIX was framed in 1810, followed by Madras Regulations VII in 1817. Then Treasure
Trove Act 1878 was brought into force. This was followed by the promulgation of other
acts on preservation of ancient monuments and sites and also of antiquities viz.
Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act 1958 and AMASR Rules
1959 and Antiquities and Art Treasures Act 1972 and AAT Rules 1973,

The Central Government through the AMASR Act, 1958 empowered the
Archaeological Survey of India to regulate archacological excavations in the country.
The Sections 21, 22, 23 and 24 of this Act empower an archaeological officer or an
officer authorized by him in this behalf or any person holding a license granted in this
behalf under this Act, after giving notice in writing to the Collector and the owner, to
enter upon and make excavations in any protected area (section 21). The
archaeological officer can also carry out excavations in unprotected area (section 22).
The Central Government is empowered to acquire antiquities found during any
excavation work (section 23). The State Governments require approval of the Central
Government to undertake any excavation or other field operations for archaeological
purposes in any area, which is not a protected area (section 24).

Proposals for excavation by universities and learned institutions are required
to be routed through the concerned State Governments and Rule 26 (chapter IV) of the
AMASR Rules 1959 empowers the Central Government to depute an archaeological
officer to inspect the excavation or operation while it is in progress and render such
advice as he deems necessary. Forms II, III, IV and V of the said Rules are concerned
respectively with following aspects:

2|Page


(i) Applications for license to excavate in a Protected Area;

(ii) License for Excavations in a Protected Area;

(iii) Report on Antiquities excavated in a Protected Area; and

(iv) Report on Antiquities excavated by an Archaeological Officer.

3. UNESCO RECOMMENDATIONS

The General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization (UNESCO), in its meeting at New Delhi on 5 December 1956,
adopted the Recommendation on International Principles Applicable to Archaeological
Excavations. It was considered that, though the regulation of Excavation is first and
foremost for the domestic jurisdiction of each country, this principle should be
brought harmony with principles of liberally understood and widely accepted
international co-operation. Archacological Excavations were defined for the purpose of
the Recommendation as "any research aimed at the discovery of objects of
archaeological character, whether such research involves digging of the ground or
systematic exploration of its surface or is carried out on the bed or in the sub-soil of
inland or territorial waters of a Member State". For protection of the archacological
heritage, the Recommendation for each Member State is to make archacological
explorations and excavations subject to prior authorization by the competent authority
and impose penalties for any infringement of the regulations. In order to provide for
benefit from improved techniques and advance in archaeological scholarship in future,
the Recommendations suggest that in case of larger sites, insofar as the nature of the
land permits, well-defined ‘witness' areas might be left unexcavated in several places
to allow for future verification of the stratigraphy and archaeological features of the
site. It also suggests that Member States should encourage planning of excavations by
joint missions of scientists from their own countries and of archaeologists representing
foreign institutions or international missions. It is also enjoined upon the excavator to
publish the results of his work within the period stipulated in the deed, or, in cases
lacking such stipulations, within a reasonable period. The authorities should also
prevent photographic or other reproduction of unpublished archaeological material.
The above Recommendations of the UNESCO (also known as Delhi Declaration), have
been accepted by the Member States including India.

4, SUGGESTED PRIORITY AREAS IN FUTURE ARCHAEOLOGICAL
EXPLORATIONS AND EXCAVATIONS

The archaeological research comprises Exploration and Excavation along with
allied studies such as geo-archacology, palaeo-environment, paleontology, palaeco-
botany, ancient metallurgy as. As defined in Wheeler Report 1965 Exploration and
Excavation are closely complementary activities. For every excavation careful objective
oriented exploration is a pre-requisite.

The Exploration comprises the discovery and recording of ancient sites and.
remains still visible on the surface of the ground while excavation unearths the
archaeological remains embedded below the surface of the earth. The explorations
include  village-to-village exploration, probiem oriented exploration, salvage
exploration, under water exploration and occasional exploration on the information
received from the public, media and other sources.

The Excavation comprises debris clearance, salvage operation, problem oriented
excavations - trial excavation, small scale excavation, and large scale excavation.
3|Page


The various programmes of exploration and excavation undertaken in the
country since the establishment of the Asiatic Society have given us a good picture of
the richness of India’s archaeological record stretching back to more than a million
years. As desired by Mortimer Wheeler at the end of his tenure in concept paper
entitled “Archaeological Fieldwork in India’, “Planning Ahead”, Ancient India, No. 5,
(1949), Indian archaeology since Independence has achieved remarkable success in
the construction of regional time-tables of cultures. We have a fairly good knowledge
of the broad cultural contents and chronological limits of these frameworks.

But we need to avoid complacence. The frameworks are still by and large
skeletal and need to be filled up with flesh and blood. We need to complement
classificatory and descriptive accounts with culture process-oriented studies.
Secondly, our existing knowledge is confined to a small portion of the total
archaeological record of the country. There are many and vast stretches of the
landscape which are yet to be brought under archaeological investigations. There are
good indications that these landscape patches too have remains of the Stone Age,
protohistoric, historical and mediaeval periods. This gap in the spatial coverage of
fieldwork particularly stares us in the face in the context of threats to archaeological
sites arising from various developmental projects initiated or being planned in different
parts of the country. The vast number of sites destroyed under the Upper Krishna
and Narmada Sarovar irrigation projects constitute a painful example. A two-fold
effort is required for attending to this situation: a) changes in research strategies; and
b) identification of problem-oriented research projects covering various time-periods..

A) Changes in Research Strategies

1. There is a clear need to rise above the level of cataloguing and classificatory
studies of archaeological sites and recognize the cultural processes responsible
for them. In other words, culture process approach is called for, which treats
human cultures as systemic and functioning entities. The processual
perspective advocates the adoption of a regional approach to the archaeological
record, as against the one-site or big-site approach of earlier periods. The
emphasis now is on the identification of all kinds and sizes of sites from the
point of view of formation processes, Understanding of the distribution pattern
of sites against the background of seasonality of climate and resources of the
landscape results in the reconstruction of past cultures as settlement systems.

2. Settlement system approach to the past calls for a close integration of cultural
and environmental data. Reconstruction of palaeoenvironments requires the
close application of various geo- and biological sciences. While adopting these
approaches one has to keep in mind the tremendous geographical diversity that
exists in India — in rainfall, vegetation, soils, topography, etc. This could have
generated tremendous cultural diversity. We clearly need to rise above the level
of treating various cultural phases as uniform or unvarying all-India level
entities.

3. Since the landscape is undergoing rapid transformation due to the initiation of
various developmental projects, it should be made obligatory on the part of all
agencies involved in field studies to give priority to these areas while planning
their research projects.

4. Revival of village-to-village survey needs immediate attention. Also changes
should be made in the existing antiquarian laws to introduce contract
archaeology or Culture Resource Management (CRM).

5. Scientific dating of sites including rock art sites needs to be taken up on a
larger scale.

4([Page


6, Ethnographic recording of the rich diversity that exists in the living hunter-

gatherer and agropastoral groups of various parts of the country will provide
many useful analogies for reconstructing past cultural processes.

7. Careful strategic planning of excavation for a period of years, SO far as possible
on a regional or even an all -India basis. More intensive explorations coupled
with excavations are called for particularly in outlying areas like Kashmir and
North-east India and Southern tip of India.

8. While planning field projects support and advice may be sought from the
Ministry of Environment, Ministries of Rural Development and Agriculture,
Geological Survey and Anthropological Survey.

9, Since present day archaeological investigations comprise a lot of scientific
studies closer collaboration with the Universities, IIf’s and other scientific
institutions is highly required, It will address the archaeological problems
related to scientific studies and develop these institutes as well as ASI with the
required expertise.

10.Full use of students-assistance should be ensured to create expertise in
Exploration and Excavation.

11.Public education about local archaeological sites should highlight the pluralistic
character of our heritage and promote what Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru called
scientific temper of mind among our people. As Mahatma Gandhi desired,
people should be made to realize that they are the trustees of heritage.

12.Time bound execution of research projects and timely publication of reports.

B) Problem-oriented Research Projects
Keeping in view the research strategies suggested above, there is a need to
formulate well planned long-term, specific, problem-oriented research projects
covering various time-periods of our past.

1. Prehistory: The following topics deserve attention:

e Understanding internal evolution with the Lower Palaeolithic.

e ‘Transition from the Lower to Middle Palaeolithic, Middle to Upper
Palaeolithic.

e Genesis of the Mesolithic and regional variability.

e Explorations in Kashmir Valley, North-east India, Southern Karnataka,
southern Tamil Nadu and other unexplored areas.

e Focussed research in Siwalik Hills, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Central India,
Chota Nagpur Plateau, Kurnool and Cuddapah basins, Kortallayar basin,
Bhima and Kaladgi basins, and the Deccan uplands to reconstruct Stone
Age settlement systems and their regional identities.

2. Protohistory: The suggested topics include the following:
e Intensive surveys in Gujarat, Rajasthan, Punjab and Haryana for location
small and big sites and recognizing regional variability in the Late
Harappan.
e Ascertaining the genesis and evolution within the Harappan culture.
e Culture process oriented studies of early farming cultures of Ganga valley.
© Recognizing sub-regional of diversity within the major agropastoral
Neolithic-Chalcolithic cultures of the country spanning 4" and 2nd
millennia BC —- in terms of differences in material culture equipment,
animals domesticated, crops raised and other aspects.
e Use of symbolic approaches for the recognizing perceptions of early
agropastoral groups vis-a-vis other human groups, plants, animals and
natural features like hills, caves and water sources.

5|Page


o.60?F;06Um]lmUlUD e¢ c¢ 8 8

@

Transition from Mesolithic to Neolithic — Chalcolithic stage.

Transitions from Neolithic-Chalcolithic stage to Iron Age.

Investigation of habitation sites of the Iron Age.

Inferring aspects of socio-economic organization from study of distribution
pattern of megalithic tombs on large sites.

Ancient quarrying and mining activities.

Ancient metallurgy.

Projects dealing with ancient plant and animal remains.

Studies of ancient human skeletal remains, using palaeopathology, DNA
and other techniques.

Rock art sites and their geographical and cultural contexts; interpretive
studies of motifs depicted.

3. Historical Period:

6

eo ¢ 8 8 ©

e

Factors responsible for Second Urbanization.

Regional diversity in the emergence of Second Urbanization.

Regional approach to the archaeological record of historical period;
construction of regional culture-sequences.

Archaeology of the coastal tracts.

Investigation of habitation sites, temples and other monuments.

Quarries and workshops of ancient art.

Architectural and epigraphically surveys.

Projects for understanding India’s cultural contacts with areas on the west
and the east.

Projects concerning archaeology of ancient trade routes.

Correlation of literary traditions with archaeological data.

Agro-archaeology -— tracing the history of cropping from seed analysis
discovering modes of hoe and plough use as well as determine seed-yield
ratios.

Hydro-archaeology - examination of old river-courses, silt accumulations,
exploration of old canals, wells, ponds and modes of water-left and
irrigation,

Industrial archaeology - Study of mechanical devices, old tools, machines
and machine parts of historical and early historical period.

Marine archaeology — study of coast-lines, rise and fall of water-levels,
ships, sailing regimes etc.

Salvage Archaeology or Operation - Salvage operation is required to
understand the cultural impact assessment of the sites which are under
threat from various - development schemes like construction of
dams/railway tracks/roads, irrigation, development of industries, urban or
agricultural development, jungle clearance and land reclamation so that the
documentation of archaeological remains is necessary before being lost to
posterity,

4. Medieval Period:

6

e

Regional approach to the study of medieval sites; construction of regional
culture-sequences,

Investigations of habitation sites including excavation for reconstructing
lifeways of people, e.g. Maratha period in Deccan.

5. Colonial Period:

e

Study of early colonial settlements and factories in the emergence and
expansion of colonial powers.
6[Page


e Colonial art and architecture.
e Colonial settlements and cemeteries.
© Under Water Archaeology.

5. GUIDELINES FOR UNDERTAKING EXPLORATIONS

1% has already been pointed out that, despite explorations undertaken over the
last two centuries and a quarter, much of the Indian landscape still remains terra
incognita from the point of view of antiquarian remains, While emphasizing the
richness of the Indian archaeological record, Wheeler remarked in his book My
Archaeological Mission to India and Pakistan (1976): “Go to any living village in India
and you will find beneath it layer upon layer of vestiges of ancient civilization”. No
meaningful picture of our past can ever be attempted without having 4 reliable
knowledge of at least a major portion of this record scattered on the landscape.

It has also been mentioned earlier that this archaeological record, consisting of
secular and religious monuments, epigraphical and numismatic materials, rock art
sites, and archaeological sites yielding a variety of objects ranging from ceramics to
simple ornaments of bone and stone, human skeletal remains, and botanical and
archaeozoological remains, has in recent times come under a serious threat due to the
initiation of many major developmental projects of yarjous kinds. There is, therefore,
an urgent need to promote explorations on an extensive scale as to facilitate recording
of new sites.
Against this background the following steps need to be taken:

e The ASI should allot adequate funds to all its circles for reintroducing
village-to-village survey in their respective regions.

e State Departments of Archaeology should also be persuaded to take up
village-to-village survey.

e University departments and other research institutions should also be
persuaded to recommend to students regional or site level explorations
topics for Ph.D., M. Phil. and M.A. dissertations. It is not necessary to
obtain prior permission for such projects which may also involve
ascertaining the nature and extent of archaeological deposit. The
universities will send to ASI detailed reports on these exploration
schemes.

e Amendment of existing antiquarian rules to make it obligatory on the
part of agencies responsible for developmental projects to have the
archaeological material of the land patch properly recorded by an
accredited institution before commencing actual project work.

© Village /Mandal Panchayats should be encouraged to report findings of
antiquarian remains in their respective revenue limits.

e Air-photography should be employed for marking the features of
ploughed out banks, filled-in ditches, street-plans, fortifications and
such other buried ghosts of landscape which are difficult to be
recognized on the ground.

6. PUBLICATION OF EXPLOARTION REPORTS

Reports on all Explorations should be prepared regularly and rendered yearly in
a state fit for publication to the Director General.

7|Page


7. GUIDELINES FOR GRANTING PERMISSION FOR EXCAVATION BY THE
CENTRAL GOVERNMENT

A) Complete information

The applicants must supply complete information in the proforma as
prescribed in Annexure 'B'. Proposals with incomplete information will be
returned to the applicants, after the preliminary scrutiny, indicating the
missing information. If the revised proposals are not received before the next
meeting of the Standing Committee (SC} of the Central Advisory Board of
Archaeology (CABA), they may not be considered for approval for that
particular season.

B) Proposal from institutions

Cc

D

—

—

E)

F)

G

—

The application made on behalf of an institution shall be signed by the
Head of the institution.

In the case of universities, the proposal made by the Professors or other
staff and not signed by the Vice Chancellor / Registrar of the University will
not be considered for approval.

Separate proposals
Separate proposals must be submitted for excavations at different sites.
Proposals mentioning more than one site will be summarily rejected.

Location of the site

Complete location with maps and details of the site including name of
ancient mound, name of locality - village/town, taluka, district and state
along with geo-coordinates should be mentioned. A proposal with sketchy
location is liable to be summarily rejected.

Previous exploration and excavation

Excavation should be taken only if necessary and as the last step in the
process of field study. It is, therefore, very important to study the site in
detail using nondestructive methods, before carrying out excavation.

The importance of the site could be assessed by the nature of antiquities
found in previous explorations and excavations. Excavations on the sites
will not be permitted unless the potentiality of site is known earlier through
detailed explorations or any excavation conducted earlier.

However, salvage excavation at any particular site in view of its likely
destruction and important findings or chance discoveries may be permitted
as an exception.

Purpose of excavation

Every excavation should have a specific purpose. If the purpose can be
understood by other means without excavation, priority should be accorded
to them, Emphasis should be given to problem-oriented investigations.

Area of excavation

No blanket permission to excavate in any area can be granted and it is
essential that the area of excavation be clearly defined. The applicant should
study the site in detail and identify the area of excavation before putting up
the proposal. A detailed plan of the site showing in red outlines the extent of
the proposed excavation or operation should be attached with the proposal.

8| Page


H) Duration of excavation

1)

J)

For successful completion and achieving the goal of any excavation, it is
necessary that the excavation be planned in detail. Proposed duration of the
excavation or operation and date of commencement of the excavation should
be decided keeping in view the availability of funds and other factors.
Applicant should adhere to the time schedule mentioned in the proposal,
unless there are unavoidable reasons to make changes in the given time-
schedule. In that case, the applicant must inform the changed schedule to
the authorities of Central Government as well as State Government in
advance.

It will help to prepare a national calendar for excavations that will
facilitate archaeologists, archacological officers, researchers and students to
visit various excavation sites.

Funds for excavation

Applicants not having sufficient funds to meet the required expenditure
on the proposed excavation or operation would not be given approval for
excavation. Besides fieldwork-sufficient funds should also be earmarked for
preparation of excavation report.

Institutions having limited funds are advised to concentrate their
resources at a few specific sites and carryout systematic work with detailed
scientific studies, such as absolute dating and analyses of soil samples and
plant material and animal zones. They may apply to the Archaeological
Survey of India for matching grant if funds are not sufficient to carry out
work for a particular season.

Director of excavation

Excavation at any site shall be conducted under the supervision of one
Director only.

The excavation will not be approved merely on the basis of the status of
the Director. He shall have enough experience to handle the entire
excavation project.

The Director of excavation should have participated in at least five
excavations and actually worked in the excavations for a reasonably long
period of time. In exceptional cases the Standing Committee may waive this
condition and record the reasons thereof in writing, Barring exceptional
circumstances, which are to be recorded in writing, Director of the
excavation shall not be changed.

Any proposal for excavation which does not mention the details of
previous excavations carried out by the Director and the stage of publication
of previous report(s) of his excavation(s} may not be approved.

K) Equipments and staff

L)

The applicant should have sufficient trained staff and instruments
required for the proposed excavation. Applicants not having sufficient
photographic, surveying and other equipments shall not be permitted to.
excavate.

Collaboration

Collaboration between various institutions specializing in various fields
of archaeology and science should be encouraged. Role of various
collaborative agencies should be well defined.

9|Page


In the case of collaboration with foreign agency, it would be the
responsibility of Indian collaborator to act as Director of excavation and to
ensure that the excavated material is kept in safe custody in the Indian
institution, and the provisions of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological
Sites and Remains Act, 1958 are implemented. The foreign expert would be a
collaborator or the Co-Director to assist the Director of the Excavation
Project.

No archaeological samples shall be sent outside the country for scientific
analysis or dating without the approval of the Director General,
Archaeological Survey of India.

(M) Publication of excavation reports
No excavation is complete till its report is published and made available
to public. Publication of excavation report is an integral and the most
important part of any excavation.

The time schedule to be given to the Project Directors for writing and
submission of Excavation Reports will be as follows:

(a) Brief reporting in respective Indian Archaeology: A Review - ANNUALLY,

(b) Interim Report of the work done in each season comprising relevant section
drawings, stratigraphy, important findings with illustrations. - ANNUALLY.

(c) Excavation report after the conclusion of the excavation as per Wheeler
Committee Report 1965 —- comprising the facts of the excavation, the plan of
a site, its stratigraphy, the relationship of buildings and objects to the
culture or cultures, a brief definition of these cultures in the light of present
knowledge, a precise account of the work done. SIX MONTHS.

The reports will be in pdf format (printable) comprising Black & White images
may be with a maximum resolution of 300 dpi, and the colour images with 600
dpi.

The published material under the above reports has to be available for
the Scholars/Researchers/Students/Public to utilize the data for their
knowledge and research work.

Those who have not followed above time schedule may not be permitted
to take up any other excavation till their previous report(s) are submitted
for publication.

Priority has to be given to clear up the back log of the reports on work
already done.

(O) Other Relevant Information
Any other relevant information furnished by the applicant may be
considered for approval of the proposal.

(P) Approval of the State Governments
Proposal for any excavation by the University or learned institution
would not be considered for approval without the approval of the concerned
state government.

(Q) Recommendations to be recorded

10| Page


All the proposals will be signed by the Standing Committee of the CABA
and its recommendations and decisions will be recorded.

(R) Decisions to be conveyed
Decisions of the Standing Committee shall be conveyed to all the
applicants.

{S) Number of Excavations
Director of any excavation shall not be allowed to take up more than
TWO excavations in a field season.
Limited excavations would help in utilizing the staff, equipments and
funds to carry out systematic excavation with detailed analysis. This in turn
would bring better results and help in faster preparation of reports.

8, CULTURAL EXCHANGE PROGRAMME WITH FOREIGN COUNTRIES

‘The Archaeological Survey of India should attach young Indian archaeologists
for foreign/ or Indian mission working in the archaeology of other countries with
which India had cultural relationship in the past, for example, West Asia, Central
Asia, South East Asia, China and Africa. It would help towards developing
specialization in archaeology of those countries. In the same way, archacologists of
those countries may be provided facilities to participate in the excavation and other
field works in India. Such participation would inter-alia put Indian achievements in a
wider context.’

9. PREPARATION OF CATALOGUES OF ANTIQUITIES

Archaeological Survey of India, State Departments of Archaeology, Universities
and other organizations have in their possession vast collection of objects and
antiquities of various kinds obtained from explorations and excavations. In order to
facilitate their use by other scholars for research/reference purposes and also to
document them for purpose of future record, it is necessary to prepare catalogues or
registers of these objects. The following suggestions are made in this regard:

e The institutions responsible for explorations/excavations and holding the
collections in their possession shall prepare period and site-wise registers or
catalogues of all finds.

e For this purpose funds may be made availability by the National Mission on
Monuments and Antiquities.

e These catalogues shall be completed in a period of five years. They should be
published, as they will have tremendous value from both documentation and
research points of view.

11|Page


Annexure-A

List of Some Important Excavated/Explored Archaeological Sites in India

(A) Prehistoric Sites
Pallavaram, Gudiyam, Poondi, Attirampakkam, Vadamadurai, Nellore,
Amridhamanglam, Yigacaripalem, Kovalli, Devapur, Sanganakallu, Peddarachapalli,
Hunsgi, Yediyapur, Isampur, Lakhmapur, Jwalapuram, Wajjal, Yerragondapalem,
Billa Surgam, Muchchatla Chintamani Gavi, Hagargundge, Nagarjunakonda,
Giddalur, Nandipakkam (in Southern India}.

Mahadeo Piparia, Maheshwar, Adamgarh, Bhimbetka, Anagwadi, Gangapur,
Nevasa, Patne, Bori, Morgoon, Kandivli, Mula-Mutha, Karwi, Lodhwara, Manikpur,
Lalitpur, Khyad, Mandsaur, Chirki, Lahchura, Rehli, Ghagra, Harat, Aslana, Mariado,
Bariari, Ramchandra Hill, Durendi, Sitapur, Shahdol, Sidhi, Bilaspur, Hoshangabad,
Narasinghpur, Chandil, Chaibasa, Ghatsila, Sini, Choli, Khatki Mata, Kalegaon,
Paithan, Bhadne, Boregaon Nandur, Ambejogai, Deva-Kachar, Burman Ghat, Sihra,
Ghatsemtra, Hasrai, Gonchi, Mori (in Central India and Deccan).

Bhutia, Hajra-Kheri, Beawar, Champakheri, Vedul-Lachervu’ Rampura,
Warsora, Goda, Chittaurgarh, Tilwara, Bagor, Langhnaj Tarasang, Ambakut, Jogpura
(in Western India}.

Paisara, Bhimbandh, Susunia, Daphabum, Kangsbati, Dhekulia, Pratappur,
Marvania (in Eastern India).

Pahalgam, Banganga, Nalagarh, Sirsa, Markanda, Dera, Kharauni, Chandi
Mandir, Guler, Jurro, Pinyani, Terra, Moh, Jagatpur, Nandi, Mananu, Paltha,
Bhangarh, Nanakanthur, Chikalia, Nabharagarh, Khadki, Anangpur, Basauli,
Lekhania, Sarai Nahar Rai {in Northern India}.

Besides these, a large number of sites and group of sites on river valleys and
hilly ranges throughout the country have been investigated.

(B} Neolithic Sites
Kupgal, Sauganakallu, Nagarjunakonda, Jalahalli, Banahalli, Sawyerpuram,
Maski, Piklihal, Utnur, T. Narsipur, Tekkalakotta, Hallur, Kodekal, Budihal,
Paiyampalli, T. Katlupatti, Brahmagiri (in Southern India).

Eran, Basoda, Besnagar, Amakheda, Pipalia, Lorka, Nayakheda, Nandura,
Maheshwar, Navdatoli, Pipalda, Badada, Chikalda, Khedi, Bagor, Kuchai, Adamgarh,
Pachmarhi, Langhnaj, Marve, Yerangal (in Central and Western India).

Baidpur, Chirand, Sonepur, Oriup, Pandu Rajar Dhibi, Ban Asuria, Kachinda,
Kankradara, Barkola, Bangarh, Tamluk, Chakradharpur, Chitra, Abri, Rengchengiti,
Ringigiri, Selbalgiri, Rokimi, Karami, Siromi, Lazimi, Itumi, Deojali Hading, Samtaru
(in Eastern India).

Mahagra, Koldihwa, Damdama, Jhusi, Toxwa, Lahuradewa, Sohgaura, Malpur,
Burzahom, Gofkral, Kanispur (in Northern India).

(C) Chalcolithic and Harappan Sites
Kallur, Patpad, Pusalpadu, Singanapalli, Banahalli, Kesarapalle, Maski,
Piklihal, Brahmagiri, Sanganakallu, Tekkalakotta, Hallur, T. Narsipur, Hemmige (in
Southern India).

12| Page


Gungeria, Lothal, Surkotada, Dholavira, Kalibangan, Ropar, Sanghol, Banawali,
Dhalewan, Baror, Chak 86, Rakhigarhi, Desalpur, Prabhas Patan, Somnath,
Junikuran, Khinsara, Mehgam, Telod, Bhagatrav, Malwan, Rangpur, Nageshwar,
Vagad, Bagasra, Nagwara, Loteshwar, Santhuli, Padri, Kuntasi, Rozdi, Ratanpura,
Navdatoli, Chandoli, Malwa, Jorwe, Kayatha, Daimabad, Savalda, Prakash, Bahal,
Inamgaon, Nagda, Eran, Tekwada (in Central and Western India and Deccan).

Lal Qila, Mitathal, Ahar, Balathal, Gilund, Ojiyana, Siswal, Noh, Atranjikhera,
Kalibangan, Banawali, Baror, Bhirrana, Rakhigarhi, Bara, Ropar, Sanghol, Kunal,
Tarkhanwala Dera, Lahuradewa, Imlidih, Sohgaura, Narahan, Alamgirpur, Manda,
Daulatpur, Bhagwanpura, Katpalon, Dher Majra, Kotla Nihangkhan, Nagar, Dadheri,
Saipai, Bahadrabad, Rajpur Parsu, Hastinapur, Jodhpura, Hulas, Sothi, Ambicheri,
Bargaon, Sinauli, Farmana, Chak-86, Koldihwa, Khajuri, Kakoria, Jhusi, Hetimpur,
Mahadaha, Damdama, Waina, Khairadih (in Northern India),

Sonepur, Chirand, Parihati, Pandu Rajar Dhibi, Haraipur, Mahisdal,
Bharatpur, Kotasur, Hattiga, Barabelun, Mangalkot (in Eastern India),

(D) Iron Age, Megalithic and Historical Sites

Arikamedu, Chandravalli, Sengamedu, Hallur, Tekwada, Adichanallur, Sanur,
Kunnattur, Takalghat, Paiyampalli, Katia, Halingali, Sankavaram, Pallavaram,
Brahmgiri, Savandurg, Feroke, Maski, Jadigenahalli, Heggadevanakote, Kudige,
Terdal, T.Narsipur, Machad, Pazhayannur, Porkalam, Banavasi, Udayavara, Sannathi,
Hampi, Vadgaon-Madhavpur, Kanchipuram, Vasavasamudram, Karur,
Tirukkampuliyur, Alagarai, Uraiyur, Kaveripattinam, Korkai, Nattamedu, Ganganose
(in Southern India);

Junapani, Mahurjhari, Takalghat, Khapa, Naitkund, Khaiwara, Dharanikota,
Nagarjunakonda, Amaravati, Lam, Pochampad, Raigir, Yelleswaram, Ujjain, Vidisa,
Besnagar, Tripuri, Eran, Paithan, Ter, Kolhapur, Paunar, Bhokardan, Kesarapalle,
Salihundam, Prakash, Paunar, Brahmapuri, Guntapalli, Jaggayyapeta, Ghantasala,
Alluru, Bhattiprolu, Kottur, Vengi (in Central India and Deccan).

Shamlaji, Nagara, Kamrej, Bharuch, Veraval, Hathab, Somnath, Akota,
Vadnagar, Devnimori, Champaner, Patan, Junagarh (in Western India}.

Chandraketugarh, Tamluk, Sisupalgarh, Sonpur, Chechar, Vaisali, Rajgir,
Campa, Chirand, Kumrahar, Pandu Rajar Dhibi, Boral, Harinarayanpur, Haripur,
Deulpota, Atghara, Nalanda, Ghorakatora, Juaffardih, Antichak, Bangath,
Rakshasidanga, Rajbadidanga, Chiruti, Ambari, Suryapahar, Bhishmakanagar,
Boxanagar, Shyamsunder Tila, Barabati Fort, Udaygiri, Lalitgiri, Ratnagiri, Langudi
Hill, Khiching, Bandh, Chowdwar, Churangadh (in Eastern India).

Ahichchhatra, Alamgirpur, Allahpur, Hastinapur, Khalaua, Mathura, Ropar,
Sravasti, Noh, Kampil, Jakhera, Ayodhya, Kausambi, Sringaverapura, Bhardwaj
Ashram, Piprahwa and Ganwaria, Rajghat, Bhita, Siswania, Sankisa,
Muhammadnagar, Harnol, Orai, Lalkot, Salimgarh, Purana Qila, Tughlaqabad,
Adilabad, Mandoli, Bhorgarh, Jhatikra, Ahar, Chandravat, Burzahom, Kanispur,
Semthan, Ambaran, Guru Baba-Ka-Tibba, Jafarchak, Gofkral, Fatehpur Sikri,
Kokoria, Lathiya, Nindaur, Bhitari, Mason, Sohgaura, Kananj, Hulaskhera,
Sanchankot, Agiabir, Prahladpur, Bairat, Jodhpura, Nagari, Rang Mahal, Agroha,
Kashipur, Kusinagara, Sarnath, Virabhadara (in Northern India).

13|Page
