New Pathways
New Hooe

National Mental Health Policy of India

Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Government of India
October 2014



New Pathways
New rope

National Mental Health Policy of India

Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Government of India
October 2014


_ ese ing

git

# Pet Arey oe oar ima a)
oF Wta Wht

Sl Ed mig es Government of India

On Harsh Yerdh oe Tr aA

, Tieeaee
I |

pasty
» bin cline front time immemorin! recopatses- ihe

Telotienship heiecen mind, Boky and saul and ie [mpoct on menial
hen. In today’s wosld, lifesyte chungss, along with socia! ond
ecanomis inequalities have Increased che individual ond socleto] stress,
makiay os more vulnerable tr mentab MM health.

gS

wa

a The be: dlnectionnt relationshtp of mental ll healih ond povern,
is evidenced in mony reports, including the World Pisnbility report,
20D, thud Vues persons with disabilities ot the-botom-of the Pataraidl
This alert tn to what could well become op health erlzis, whit
consgiences that ure ws to. view this phenomenon es beth g health
and i development lorperatline.

a, Taking copmizince.of tis Bue, and tee gecsthye impact that I
eed precipitzic bn oahe fs of yneraWe peepte, ow Govenoocnt
proposes to doke firm action Townrds. this end, we ore introducing a
poogresshye Mdoinl Elealih Policy that auliines a tlear plan to tackle
thts problem. Our stone iminat to peemade equity and Justice bs
teinlacerd fn our commitment 60 olleviote distress, build cepabiliies
md reoch marginalized proups.

4 This. poliey ablempls te build o robust response to 2 complex
problent that alfecte nvullipte dimenstuns of life. Alost impartanlly.
tndia’s first Naltonnl Meniol Health Policy is embedded in a value
Spot ihnt upholds a participatory and rlalis based epprogch ond sinas
te pmimute quollty in service pervislon ond efecirencss ln delvery

i { ennypralulote the members of the Policy Group for tele
continued enpapement in developing this documenc Wes thls yJslon,
or Govemnment aspires to reach ihe fost mile pad provide core bn a
combend thal respects clignity and life. Que efforis will remote dedesinl
Krorurts Ihis perat.

5, Phope all stakeholders will com togedher to ensure the suecess
of this policy.

b
GOL

Dr, arch Mardin)

th wea, Gea wee, ae f-110017
S42, AeWing, Wirnan Bhawan, New Dene110011
Tele : (0: 494-141-2308 1647, 23061661, 29061751, Telafax : 23062456, 23081645
E-mail: drhrshvandhamngig mail.com. de barshvardhani@inic.in : Website : ddharanvardhan.coam


Sas

3 — = Garommant of [ridia
LOY VERMA ase44 operant el Haelih and Family Welfare
secretary Pinistry of Health and Family Walfare

Oe the ecezslon of whe (werd Mental Heath Day, the Ministry of Health and Famiy
Wollate, Government of India is announeing Des fired Haliond! Mevdul Heallh Posey of
India, Tie poficy fe an attemat to decreesa the treatment gap. disease borfen and
exletil of cigabildy doe bo menial illness. Tic palsy Lies ins aceeunt indles ace
cull roalitios. and is eobedded In-a solve system Nhat promebes Infereded and
evidence based care, governance and effective proviesio of.quay services, Furies,
U adinesass, needs ol percope with mental Minesses, thelr ean providers-end ther
sake hoders.

There i idence woelkyide UE menial disorders are-arangst the leading cauces.
for disabaty bade Thay impose high socromic costs and Impact quacty of Eo of
peor atecied wanimercal ke2ch prowame. The Neen. ay Sten of the country does
net, as yol, have @ compreherive seseemees system ba deldress mepcital hea esee9.

integralien éf mens] heeth wih gensral! hesth; istedecioral coordination that
focuses en both ieiss and Gsabilily, promotion oF funicin Takis, raters in menial
hoepitals, reeponse to the needa of. vatherabla gretps includiey women, chien,
herieles persons wih mental lines, ene aupport fer caraghere and fancies are
some oF ihe fealioes of the Mi entd Hall Policy, presented [n Sarsequent chapfers,

The patey & formulated pursuant to-recamméndaGena of an expert grap, after
getbortigns and consulltllors bol within Dee grag aad wilh her atskebalders: |
thank 29 tha meobers of the policy grap SaZendra Kumar Deut, Akhieshwar
Bahay, Jitak.tsadn, Aninadh Kals, Winnala Srinhvasan, Senicay Jain, Soumfhra
Pathero. Thelma Narayan, Werson Pated, Vitrenr Supls ore Vana Gapdecmar,

[ Ears BLY gralde to my predecessar in ollie, wr Keshoy Geosinatr-foc his
valuabte contibyton, Ms. Sujaya Kreshnay, tho-lhen Joint Stemtary, i enange ot
Menta] Reeth , fuirector General of Heel Services: Dr. Jagdish Prasad, Additions
Stores, Nir, 1. K Mishra upd Or, Anan Kianar Panda, Jom Secretary fir, Anche,
Prekach and Deputy Biredtor Goneral Dr. S.K. Singh fer beanging Hes potcy
documedil oa fegipal eanclusiom

| truet-aind hope thal tits PoSoy will pave the path fot coated aed eptatgratlye
gait In Oar renkel health secjar,

oe

“tien Verma

“Gert 2156, tar, Fi wen, TE fergi00u
Room Ae. 158, AAWing, Hinnem Bhavan, New Belhl-(10074
Jets: (01 OT1-7S0G1853, Fac: 01122081252, E-mail : secynhwgignta%com


Contents

TOrMinOlOQy .......ceseeesseccceeeeeeecesseneaeeeeeeesesseneaaeeeeneeessesssaneeeeeeenesensenaaeees
PrO@Mble .00.... eee ceee cence eee eee e teen ee eee tener tees eeaaaee sees eens eaaaeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeenaaaeees ii
EX@CUtive SUMMALY .........cecceeceeeeeeeeeeee eee eee eeeeeeeaeeeeeeeaeeeeetteaeeeeeesaeeeeeees 1

1 AY 2S) (0) pee 3
2 Values and principles ........ eect ceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeneeeeeeeeeeeeeeeenaaes 3
3 LC Tor-VI- late Ke) 0) (=(e11\\/-\: eee ee 5
oe © (0)- | (eee 5
x, Wy-a @©] 0) (516), <1: eee 5
4 CroSS-Cutting iSSUCS........ceeeceeeeeeceteeeeeeee ceseaeeessssaeeeeessneeeeensaees 6
Oe Rn) (C00 = ee 6
4.2 Rights based approach ..........eceeecesseeeceeeeeseeenseneeeeeeeneessssaeeeneeeees 7
4.3 Vulnerable populations ............e ee eeeceeecee cess eeennneeeeeeeeeeeeeeneeeeeeenees 7
4.4 Adequate fUNGING ........... ce ceecce eee eeee cere teense eeeeeeeeeeeneeeeeeteaenees 9
4.5 Support for famili@s ...........cccccessssssseecceeeeessessneeeeeeeesssessseeseeeeeeeess 10
4.6 — Inter-sectoral collaboration 0.0.00... .eeeeeeeeeeeeee eee eeeeeeeeeeeeeteeeeeeeeaaees 10
4.7 — Institutional Cre oo... eee sete eee eeee seer eeeeeeeeeeceneeeeenaeeeeeeeneeeeeee 10
4.8 Promotion of mental health «0... eee eee eee teense eee eeeeeeeeaee 11
4.9 RRESCAICH 00... eee eect eee eee e tenance ee eee eet eaaeeeeee tees eee aaeeaeeeeneeeeeeeenaaes 11


5.1

5.2

5.3

5.4

5.5

5.6

5.7

Strategic directions and recommendations Of action ..........cee
Effective governance and accountability for mental health ........
Promotion of mental health .............::ccccccesssssseeeceeeeeessesseeeeeeeeeess
Prevention of mental illness and reduction of suicide and
attempted SUICIDG 200... eee ee eect eee e teen eee eee tener teeta nee eeeee teenie
Universal access to mental health ServiCes ..........esseseeeeeeeeees
Improve availability of adequately trained mental health

human resources to address the mental health needs of the
COMMUN NY ........eeeceecccecceecceeceeeceeccesscescenecenscenscensenscenssenseenseentes
Community participation for mental health and developmert....

RESCAICH 0. .cccccccseccceceeecececueeeeceeenaceeaueceesaneeauaeeescaesauaeersceeenageea


Terminology

Mental Health is not just the absence of mental disorder. It is defined as a
state of well-being in which the individuals realize their own abilities, can
cope with the normal stresses of life, can work productively and fruitfully, and
are able to make a positive contribution to their community. Mental health
refers to a broad array of activities directly or indirectly related to mental well-
being. This is in keeping with World Health Organisation's definition of
health: A state of complete physical, mental and social well-being, and not
merely the absence of disease. Mental health is also related to promotion of
mental well-being, prevention of mental disorders, and treatment and
rehabilitation of people affected by mental disorders.

Mental health problems refers to conditions ranging from psych-osocial
distress affecting a large number of people to mental illness and mental
disability affecting a relatively small number of people.

Mental illness refers to specific conditions such as Schizophrenia, Bipolar
Disorder, Depression or Obsessive Compulsive Disorder.

Mental disability refers to disability associated with mental illness. While
mental illness is a medical construct, disability is better understood using a
medico-social model and the two terms are not used synonymously in this
document. Not all persons with mental illness will have a disability, although
many will experience it due to various barriers which may hinder their full and
effective participation in society on an equal basis with others.

Persons with mental illness and person(s) with mental health problems
refers to persons who have menial illness and mental health problems
respectively. It is necessary to emphasize that mental health illness or
mental health problem does not constitute a person's identity and that a
person and an illness and/or problem are distinct from each other.

Persons affected by mental illness include person(s) with mental illness and
significant others such as family members and care-givers.

Recovery is defined as a process of change through which individuals

improve their health and wellbeing, live a self-directed life and strive to reach
their full potential.

PO


Preamble

Both incidence and severity of mental illnesses are on the rise. The World
Health Organisation estimates that at any given time 10% of global
population suffers from some form of mental illness and one in four persons
will be affected at least once in their life time. Further, estimates suggest that
by 2020, depression, the most common menial disorder, will be the second
leading cause of disability wordwide, trailing only ischemic heart disease.
The accurate figures for India are not available.

Mental illness is a key predictor for an increase in suicide and suicide
attempts that affect a cross section of society particularly the youth and
distressed. Poverty, deprivation and other vulnerabilities further exacerbate
the ground situation.

Untreated mental illness results in stigma, marginalization and
discrimination often worsening one's quality of life. This leads to a
substantial loss of social and human capital, adversely impacting a large
number of individuals and families.

While the National Mental Health Programme addresses this concern
partially, a holistic approach to alleviating distress is necessary. The access
to mental health care is not universal and significant treatment gaps are
experienced by many, as a result of which individuals cannot pursue life to
the fullest.

Owing to the enormity of the problem, it is considered prudent to have a
strategic, integrated and holistic policy that will guide future course of action
including a pan India scaling up of existing Mental Health Program. This
policy will pave the path to address the mental health problems as they exist
currently, and to understand the mental health issues in context of our
country. This policy allows stakeholders to initiate action across a wide
spectrum of mental health issues to enhance our understanding of its
different contours, refine our response system and showcase to the world a
comprehensive mental health response. In that sense, this policy is intended
to be dynamic; all encompassing and growing with regular review and
feedback from people.

PO


Executive Summary

In April 2011, the Government of India constituted a Policy Group to
recommend a mental health policy for the country. After due deliberations
and intense discussions, in accordance with the mandate, the group has
submitted recommendations. The suggested mental health policy has been
duly considered by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government
of India. After minor amendments, additions and changes, the first National
Mental Health Policy has been formulated. The Policy envisages dynamic
engagement and is expected to accommodate future thinking and
developments in this field.

This Policy acknowledges the significance and importance of relevant and
useful local knowledge and practices. While some of the policy
recommendations are generic in nature, details have also been
incorporated where necessary, especially to highlight neglected issues.
Global thinking has been taken into account along with ground realities and
variations of the Indian context. Significantly, the need to address the social
determinants of mental health such as poverty, environmental issues and
education are duly recognized.

This Policy is inclusive in nature and incorporates an integrated,
participatory, rights and evidence based approach. Mental health issues are
addressed in a comprehensive manner to address medical and non-medical
aspects of mental health. This Policy does not reduce mental health
interventions to merely disease and disability prevention and it takes into
account the need for all stakeholders to work synergistically and achieve
common policy goals.

The strategic areas identified for action are, inter alia, effective governance
and accountability, promotion of mental health, prevention of mental
disorders and suicide, universal access to mental health services, enhanced
availability of human resources for mental health, community participation,
research, monitoring and evaluation.

The Government believes that mental health is an integral part of our overall
health endeavour. A holistic approach that recognizes strong linkage of

PO


body, mind and soul is necessary. Strengthening of health infrastructure
must be effected along with addressing the social determinants of health
and mental health.

It is significant that the 65" World Health Assembly held in 2013 approved
and adopted Resolution WHA 65.4 on global burden of mental disorders and
the need for a comprehensive, co-ordinated response from the health and
social sectors at the community level. India was one of the main sponsors of
this resolution. This National Mental Health Policy is in consonance with the
intent of this WHA Resolution.


1. Vision

The vision of the National Mental Health Policy is to promote mental health,
prevent mental illness, enable recovery from mental illness, promote de-
stigmatization and desegregation, and ensure socio-economic inclusion of
persons affected by mental illness by providing accessible, affordable and
quality health and social care to all persons through their life-span, within a
rights-based framework.

2. Values and Principles

Fundamental values and principles representing the ethos of this policy are
discussed below:

2.1 Equity

¢ Mental health services should be sensitive and relevant to diverse
social and cultural situations and groups and, to the need of remote
and rural areas.

¢ An equitable share of the national health budget should be
consistent with the burden of mental health problems and mental
illness.

¢ Non-discrimination and equal opportunities for education,
employment, housing and social welfare should be provided to
promote inclusion of persons with mental health problems and
mental illness

2.2 Justice
¢ The needs of vulnerable and excluded members of the community
should receive particular attention.

2.3 Integrated care
¢ Mental health services should be provided within the existing
health care system using the Primary Health Care approach.
¢ Some mental illnesses are chronic in nature. Persons suffering
from chronic illness would require provisions for medium and long
term, in some cases even life-long the provision of services should
keep this requirementin consideration.

PO


2.4

2.5

2.6

2.7

¢ These services should espouse the principles of universal access,
equitable distribution, community participation, inter-sectoral
coordination and use of appropriate technology. It is essential to
make mental health services universally available and accessible
in atime bound manner.

¢ Mental health services should be comprehensive and address the
needs of person with mental illness, their care providers and health
care professionals.

Evidence based care

¢ Evidence based interventions should inform decisions regarding
provision of services.

¢ Decision making should be based on various evidences for
instance: findings from research, practice based evidence and
feedback from clients.

Quality
¢« Mental health services should meet quality standards as mandated
globally and perceived suitable by local users and care-givers.

Participatory and rights based approach

¢ Service users and caregivers should be involved in the planning,
development, delivery, monitoring and evaluation of mental health
services.

¢ Human rights and dignity of persons with mental health problems
should be respected, protected and promoted.

¢ Mental health care should promote and protect the autonomy and
liberty of person(s) with mental health problems.

¢ The rights of the caregiver and service provider should also be
respected by ensuring good working conditions, adequate training
and support.

Governance and effective delivery

¢ The union and state governments, have a major role in actions for
promotion of mental health, prevention of mental illness and
treatment of mental illness in the country. However governments
alone cannot ensure effective delivery. Other stakeholders such as
private care providers, civil society organizations, user groups,
academic and research institutions also have a crucial role in
delivery and guiding policy.

4

PO


}

oo

Services and professionals involved in health care planning and
delivery whether in public, private or non-government sector
should at all times display the utmost devotion to duty and be
responsible for their actions.

Services and service providers are ultimately accountable to
person(s) with mental illness and their care-givers.

2.8 Value base in all training and teaching programs

oo

Core values such as quality, integrity, justice, accountability and
empathy should be built into all forms of training and academic
teaching.

2.9 Holistic approach to mental health

}

¢

A holistic approach to health including recognition of the
relationship between mind, body and soul is more effective in
dealing with mental health problems.

Cultural ethos, Indian traditions and their impact on behavioural
patterns must be recognized and leveraged to achieve policy goals
and objectives.

3. Goals and Objectives

Based on the vision and drawing on the values and principles outlined in the
previous Sections, the goals and objectives of the mental health policy are
as follows:

3.1 Goals

3.1.1

3.1.2
3.1.3

To reduce distress, disability, exclusion morbidity and premature
mortality associated with mental health problems across life-span
of the person.

To enhance understanding of mental health in the country.

To strengthen the leadership in the mental health sector at the
national, state, and district levels.

3.2 Objectives

3.2.1
3.2.2

To provide universal access to mental health care.

To increase access to and utilisation of comprehensive mental
health services (including prevention services, treatment and care
and support services) by persons with mental health problems.

5

PO


3.2.3

3.2.4

3.2.5
3.2.6

3.2.7
3.2.8

3.2.9

To increase access to mental health services for vulnerable groups
including homeless person(s), person(s) in remote areas, difficult
terrains, educationally/socially/economically deprived sections.

To reduce prevalence and impact of risk factors associated with
mental health problems.

To reduce risk and incidence of suicide and attempted suicide.

To ensure respect for rights and protection from harm of person(s)
with mental health problems.

To reduce stigma associated with mental health problems.

To enhance availability and equitable distribution of skilled human
resources for mental health .

To progressively enhance financial allocation and improve
utilisation for mental health promotion and care.

3.2.10 To identify and address the social, biological and psychological

4.

determinants of mental health problems and to provide appropriate
interventions.

Cross cutting issues

Mental health is characterized by cross cutting issues that have a far
reaching impact on the fulfilment of goals and objectives spelt out as policy
strategies and need to be addressed through efforts across society.

41

Stigma

Persons with mental health problems face stigma and discrimination in
many ways. Families are frequently unwilling to recognize the
presence of illness; even where recognized, families, parents and
others care-givers may sometimes be reluctant or afraid to seek
professional help. Absence of available, effective and affordable
services is a major barrier in large parts of the country. There is a
widespread lack of knowledge on the nature and prevalence of mental
health problems including mental illness. This lack of knowledge is
often accompanied by fear and even hostility towards those with
mental health problems, due to which such persons face exclusion
from society.

Government, opinion-makers, media and community leaders should
encourage discussions for better understanding of the nature of mental
health problems. There is a need for compassion and responsibility in
our interaction with persons affected with mental health problems
instead of stigmatizing such persons.

6

PO


4.2

4.3

4.3.1

4.3.2

Rights-based approach

Violation of their rights is a common reality for persons with mental
health problems. The design and implementation of policies,
programmes and services for persons with mental health problems
should therefore, be based on a rights-based perspective. Respecting
the rights of persons with mental health problems will reduce
stigmatizing and discriminatory behaviours. This Policy envisages that
there be more discussions in public space on Rights of persons with
mental health problems and in design of a system that upholds their
rights.

Vulnerable populations

Mental health services and related activities should take into account
the special condition and needs of vulnerable populations who bear a
disproportionate and higher burden of mental health problems.
Vulnerable populations may include inter alia, children (both school
going and out of school), women, economically and socially deprived,
older persons and persons with physical disabilities. It should be
ensured that there is no discrimination against vulnerable populations
in the provision of services. Conditions that increase vulnerability and
need to be addressed to improve mental health are discussed below:

Poverty

Poverty and mental ill health are inextricably linked in a negative
vicious cycle. Persons from lower socio-economic groups are
more vulnerable to mental health problems. Out-of-pocket health
spending to access mental health services and lost productivity
due to disability can also lead to poverty.

Homelessness

There are several linkages between homelessness and mental ill-
health. Homelessness can occur as an adverse consequence of a
mental health problem. Persons could either be abandoned by a
poorly resourced, helpless or uncaring family or wander away in
the absence of accessible and appropriate mental health care.
Conversely, the stress of living on the streets and sleeping rough
can contribute to the risk of developing mental health problems.
Person(s) with mental health problems with high support needs
and no care givers (either due to death or abandonment by family
or care-giver) are especially vulnerable. In the absence of existing
care-givers, there is almost no provision for care and support for
these persons.

7

PO


4.3.3

4.3.4

4.3.5

4.3.6

Persons inside custodial institutions

Person(s) inside custodial institutions fall into different categories
and frequently have multiple vulnerabilities. They include women
and children in rescue homes, children in institutions under the
Juvenile Justice Act, 2006 (as amended in 2011), people in
“beggars' homes”, long stay homes under the Government and
under-trials and convicts in prisons. An important aspect to be kept
in mind is the issue of deprivation of personal liberty in custodial
care.

As with other forms of social disadvantage, the relationship
between mental health problems and being in custody is bi-
directional. At present, mental health services for these vulnerable
groups are inadequate.

Orphaned persons with mental illness (OPMl)

It is believed that 70% to 80% of the persons with mental disorders
in India live with their families, and this is true across all
demographic and social variables. Once the existing care givers
are no more, there is no provision for home care and support of
these persons. As a result, many of them languish till death due to
starvation and lack of critical support systems like monitoring
medicines, personal hygiene and food etc. Not all of them fall under
category of poor, yet, those with high support needs - irrespective
of rich or poor -are highly vulnerable due to their incapacity for self-
care. This Policy recognizes that needs of this category of persons
with mental disorders have been neglected for a long time.
Children of persons with mental health Problems

Children of persons with mental health problems are vulnerable
and their needs have not been adequately addressed. They are
likely to be exposed to a range of adversities including, but not
limited to, poor parental care, disruption in parenting and schooling
and increasing poverty.

Elderly care-givers

Elderly care-givers whose own physical and mental health care
needs are high are vulnerable. Unmet needs have a negative
impact on their lives as well as the lives of those for who they
provide care. There has been little policy or service delivery action
to meet the needs of such elderly care-givers. There could be other
vulnerable care-givers such as adolescents, single person
responsible for livelihood as well as care giving, and many such
others.

8

PO


4.3.7

4.3.8

4.3.9

Internally displaced persons

There is a significant demographic shift from rural to urban areas,
often across state/regional boundaries. These individuals and
families are usually engaged in work in the unorganized sector and
have poor access to local health services. There is very little
information on the mental health needs of this group.

Persons affected by disasters and emergencies

Natural or man-made disasters are frequent causes of
psychological distress. Many local 'disasters' (building collapses;
slum-evictions; floods; riots etc.) do not get sufficient attention.
Adequate recognition of mental health consequences and
provision of both medical and social welfare responses is
necessary for persons affected by disasters.

Other marginalized populations

Marginalization and exclusion in any form are major determinants
of poor mental health. Marginalised persons such as commercial
sex workers, victims of human trafficking, victims of riot, sexual
minorities, children and those living in situations of conflict bear
disproportionate burden of mental health problems.

4.4 Adequate funding

4.4.1

4.4.2

Provision of Funds

Provision of adequate funds to realise the vision and goals of the
National Mental Health Policy is crucial. There is a reasonable
expectation and demand that in near future, funding for the health
sector should increase. Allocation to activities for mental health
promotion, prevention and treatment should also therefore
increase. Spending on health by the government is not
expenditure but a social investment and a social right. On-going
activities under the national and district mental health programmes
must continue in a strengthened and more responsive manner.
The expansion of mental health programme to the entire country
will require more funds. New activities especially in the area of
community based rehabilitation and continuing care must be
supported with adequate funding. The work of non-governmental
organizations must be encouraged and supported, in order to
achieve a collaborative and sustainable response system.
Provision of Funds across related departments

The interdependence and interlink of health and non-health
sectors (including government departments) is true for non-

9

PO


communicable diseases including mental health. It is important
that funds are allocated for mental health in various departments
and ministries such as health, social welfare, women and child
development, school education. It is also important to keep in mind
that additional funding may not be required for many social sector
programmes where, however, it is imperative to ensure that
persons with mental illness are also integrated as beneficiaries of
existing programmes.

4.5 Support for families

Currently, families are the main-stay of long term care for persons with
mental health problems. Such families bear direct financial costs of
treatment as well as associated indirect costs such as loss of wages
consequent to having to give up employment to look after sick family
member. The emotional and social costs of providing care for a family
member with mental illness cannot be quantified but exacts a huge toll
on families.

The care-giving role impacts the physical and mental health of the
care-giver. All too often, it is elderly care-givers (usually parents or
grand-parents) who are left to look after the person with mental illness
without any support from health and social care services.

Families need access to information, guidance in accessing services
for their family member and support in performing their care-giver role.
The families and care-givers of persons with mental illness should be
adequately supported to help them perform their role, especially those
with long term and chronic mental illness.

4.6. Inter-sectoral collaboration
The needs of persons with mental illness cannot be met by the health
sector alone and there is need for inter-sectoral collaboration.
Collaboration is also needed within the health sector for example
between specialist mental health and general health services as well
as outside the health sector with education, employment, housing and
social care sectors. Similarly there is need for collaboration between
the government (public) sector and the non-governmental sectors
(non-profit as well as private).

4.7 Institutional care

Mental hospitals have traditionally been a major source of treatment of
persons with mental illness. Over the last few decades, government

10

PO


4.8

4.9
4.9.1

has undertaken their reform. Even then, their access is limited, staff
inadequate and funds low. This compromises the quality of care. There
are now anumber of similar institutions operating in the private sector.
All in-patient facilities must be linked to community care to support
persons who are discharged (as indicated by the principle of continuing
care), or who are being managed in the community. This policy
recognises a spectrum of needs, ranging from appropriately
transitioned community care for a majority to long term institutional
care for a small number. As such, the need is of developing multiplicity
of care models that may be seamlessly integrated with each other.

Promotion of mental health

A healthy, safe and enriching physical and social environment
promotes individual and community mental health. The predictable
negative influences on mental health of poverty, discrimination,
malnutrition, environmental factors (including access to safe water,
toilets and sanitation), exposure to violence and absence of parental
figures (death, divorce or displacement) affect individuals across their
life span. Certain life stages have unique challenges which should be
recognised and addressed to promote mental health and overall health
and wellbeing of a population. Negative influences have varied impact
depending on life stage for example malnutrition affects children worse
than adults. There has been a relative neglect both in policy and
practice of the promotion of mental health at the community lavel.
There are however organisations and institutions that have
experimented, studied and worked on different mental health
promotion measures this experience will be built upon.

Research

Research questions

Primary role of research is to generate knowledge which will lead to
a reduction in the burden of mental health problems in India. Key
research questions include implementation research issues - how
to provide effective treatments in routine health care (for example
identification of barriers to integration of mental health into primary
health care), causes of mental disorders in the Indian context,
identification of effective treatments including those from
indigenous systems of medicine which can increase the
therapeutic choices for persons with mental health problems,

11

PO


4.9.2

4.9.3

developing a deeper understanding of the bio-psycho-social
determinants of mental health and mental illness and pathways for
action on the same; among others.

Monitoring and evaluation

There is a need for continued monitoring of the mental health of
populations both to assess changing patterns of burden over time
as well as to evaluate the impact of mental health programs.
Building research capacity

A key challenge to implement these research priorities is that of
capacity and resources to implement research; knowledge
translation; and for practitioners to use research findings and an
evidence base in a scientific and socially accountable manner.

5. Strategic directions and recommendations

of action

The strategic areas for action are linked to the situation analysis, cross
cutting issues and goals and objectives of the Mental Health Policy. Each
strategic area lists actions to achieve the vision of this policy. These
intervention areas are all equally relevant and need to be pursued in parallel.

5.1
5.2
5.3

5.4
5.5

5.6
5.7

Effective governance and delivery mechanisms for mental health
Promotion of mental health

Prevention of mental illness, reduction of suicide and attempted
suicide

Universal access to mental health services

Improved availability of adequately trained mental health human
resources to address the mental health needs of the community
Community participation for mental health and development
Research

5.1 Effective governance and accountability for mental health

5.1.1

5.1.2

Develop relevant policies, programmes, laws and regulations
within all relevant sectors in line with Mental Health Policy with
associated implementation and monitoring mechanisms.
Appropriate plans with adequate budgetary provision across
sectors to allow implementation of evidence-based mental health
plans and actions.

12

PO


Motivate and engage stakeholders from relevant sectors, in
particular persons with mental health problems, care-givers and
family members, civil society leaders and those with management
and strategic implementation expertise in the development,
implementation and evaluation of mental health policies, laws and
services, through a formal mechanism.

Develop and sustain technical capacity and suitable mechanisms
at the Centre, State, District and local levels to plan, monitor and
evaluate implementation of mental health policies, laws and
programs.

5.2 Promotion of mental health

5.2.1

5.2.2

5.2.3

5.2.4

5.2.5

5.2.6

Re-design Anganwadi Centres to cater to the early child care,
developmental and emotional needs of children below six years.
Separate attention should be given to children under the age of
three years. Introduce mother-child sessions on parenting skills
education, address threats to healthy mother- child bond.

Train Anganwadi workers and school teachers with knowledge and
skills that support and build the self-confidence of parents and
care-givers in understanding the physical and emotional needs of
children to facilitate an affirmative and positive environment for the
growth and development of children and for providing protection
against harmful behaviour.

The Life Skills Education (LSE) programme should be offered to
school children and college going young person(s) using
interactive learning methods that are age and context specific,
facilitated by teachers and trainers who are appropriately skilled.
LSE should also provide a forum for discussion on issues such as
gender and social exclusion in a manner that is appropriate and
applicable in different contexts.

Provision of LSE skills to young people outside the formal
schooling system should be ensured via youth clubs, or any other
suitable fora.

Signs and symptoms of many mental disorders (schizophrenia,
mood disorders, etc.) first appear during the adolescent years.
Individual attention in the school by teachers trained in mental
health promotion and distress alleviation is therefore important.
Similarly, equipping teachers in the primary education system with
life skills training coupled with an environment where young
students can benefit from the same is critical.

13

PO


5.2.7

5.2.8

5.2.9

5.2.10

5.2.11

5.2.12

5.2.13

5.2.14

5.2.15

Design appropriate curricula and pedagogy, teacher student
relationship, provision of suitable infrastructure including access to
toilets within the school system.

Programmes to assist adults in handling of stressful life
circumstances should be incorporated in workplace (workplace
policies) and residence support programmes. Workplace policies
should cover those employed in the organized as well as
unorganized sectors.

Reliable mental health information should be easily available. This
will inform people to protect and promote their mental health. Mass
media events, contact programmes should be organised to
disseminate such information. To supplement information,
counselling services, help lines, dedicated websites should be
made available for easy flow of information.

Increase awareness amongst policy-makers, planners and
Governments of the need to reduce poverty and income disparities
to improve mental health outcomes. Social exclusion, unequal
opportunities, income disparities and perceived lack of control over
ones social and economic life is linked to high rates of depression.
Addressing these issues at a systemic level is linked to preventive
strategies.

Encourage action to change poor living conditions such as
homelessness, overcrowding, lack of access to safe drinking
water, toilets and sanitation and provide adequate nutrition to
prevent mental health problems and mental illness. The role of
these social factors, low grade infections, micro-nutrient deficiency
(iron, foliate, vitamins, other trace elements) is also linked to
increased incidence of mental disorders, and slow and poor
recovery (and response to treatment).

Implement programmes to reduce risk factors for women's mental
health such as acts of violence against women.

Mental health promotion actions should be broad based,
embedded in all spheres of life, and not become sole prerogative or
responsibility of the mental health program, failing which this could
stigmatise mental health initiatives.

Gender sensitisation programs for health system staff should be
introduced.

Practitioners of Ayurveda and Yoga systems are a resource who
need to be included as activists for promotion of mental health.

14

PO


5.3 Prevention of mental illness and reduction of suicide and
attempted suicide

5.3.1
5.3.1.1

5.3.1.2

5.3.1.3

5.3.1.4

§.3.1.5

5.3.1.6

5.3.1.7
5.3.1.8

5.3.2

5.3.3

5.3.3.1

5.3.3.2
§.3.3.3
5.3.3.4
5.3.3.5

Address stigma, discrimination and exclusion

Enable access to treatment and to other care-giving facilities to
promote early recovery.

Encourage persons with mental health problems to actively and
fully participate in social and economic activities.

Ensure there is no discrimination against persons with mental
health problems in all aspects of seeking and retaining work,
including participating in all work related activities. Mental
disorders should be treated as a disability and suitably factored in
employment policies.

Create an environment where persons with mental health
problems are enabled to take part in regular activities (e.g. operate
bank account, obtain identity documents, obtain driving licence,
writing a will, etc.) and are not discriminated against. Mental
disability should be treated on par with any other form of disability.
Amending and/or replacing policies, laws and regulations which
discriminate against persons with mental illness.

Facilitate education for person(s) with mental health problems to
improve their employability.

To undertake communication programmes to reduce stigma

Police and judicial officers should be sensitized on mental health
and its interface with legal issues.

Implement programmes to address alcohol abuse and other drugs
of abuse

Specific action plan should be formulated to reduce the
consumption and abuses of alcohol and other addictive
substances. The action plan should include taxation, licensing,
production and other relevant issues. Susbstance use and abuse is
a problem of significant proportion hence should be addressed on
priority.

Implement suicide reduction programmes to reduce the likelinood
of suicide and attempted suicide

Restrict access to means of suicide, in particular distribution and
storage of highly toxic pesticides.

Frame guidelines for responsible media reporting of suicide.
Decriminalize attempted suicide.

Train key community leaders in recognizing risk factors for suicide.
Set up crisis intervention centres and help-lines as part of the
district mental health programme.

15

PO


5.3.3.6 Improve data collection on suicides and attempted suicides by the

National Crime Records Bureau to improve understanding of the
issue.

5.3.3.7 Address alcohol abuse (and dependence), and depression as key

risk factors for suicide and attempted suicide.

5.4 Universal access to mental health services

5.4.1

5.4.2

5.4.3

5.4.4

5.4.5

5.4.6

5.4.7

5.4.8

Comprehensive services for mental health problems should be
made universally accessible. A continuum of such services should
be available across facility, community and family. Services should
be family centric to address needs of persons with mental health
problems across life-span. All multi-speciality Government
hospitals should provide mental health services to improve access.
Increase availability of a range of community based rehabilitation
services including day care centres, short stay facilities and long
stay community facilities to promote recovery with support from
local bodies and other sources of support.

Develop norms and standards for mental health services and
implement clinical and social audits for continuous quality
improvement.

Facilitate mental health service users and their families and care-
givers formally and supported by law, if necessary, in designing,
implementing and monitoring of mental health services.

Implement community based programmes to support families and
care givers to foster recovery for persons with mental health
problems and mental illness family provides care and plays a
critical role in fostering recovery. The needs of 70-80 million care
givers (usually family care-givers) remain unaddressed. Caring for
the carer is a neglected area. There is a need to implement
programmes to address the economic needs of this very important
stakeholder group.

Formation of care-givers groups with professional inputs to
facilitate a better and accurate understanding of the particular
mental health problem their family member is living with. Care
givers to be encouraged to pursue other activities to give them
space for their own personal growth.

Implement programmes for screening, early identification and
treatment of mental health problems and mental illness.

The absolute shortage of inpatient beds for acute mental health

16

PO


5.4.9

5.4.10

5.4.11

5.4.12

5.4.13

5.4.14

5.4.15

care needs to be addressed by making provisions for the same in
general health facilities such as district hospitals, teaching
hospitals attached to medical colleges and other general hospitals.
Build effective leadership and management systems.

Develop a comprehensive mental health information system for
data collection and digitization of data.

The reform of mental hospitals should be continued to provide them
with improved infrastructure and enhanced resources to provide
quality services.

Institutionalize a culture of respect for rights of persons with mental
illness and a culture of openness and integration with their local
communities.

Financial support including monetary benefits and tax benefits to
the primary care-giver needs to be addressed. These can be based
on criteria which take into account age of the care-giver, family
income, number of hours of caregiving, whether care is provided in
hospital or athome and whether the care-givers had to give up their
job to provide care.

A multidimensional, dynamic and well-being oriented approach is
essential to address the needs of homeless persons with mental
illness. While some homeless people with mental illness may
require in-patient facilities, others need access to open shelters,
community kitchens, adequate clothing, medical support and other
social entitlements. These services may be coordinated between
Local Self Government Institutions and Social Welfare/Disability
Departments based on a National Policy on Homelessness. The
Government Policy should formulate a response towards
homeless person with mental health problems. This should include
adequate attention to preventive measures and rehabilitative
measures.

Assisted Living Services for persons with mental health problems is
a type of domiciliary care for persons with chronic and long term
illness. Those on recovery pathways can have integrated
independent housing with some minimal support systems. Thereby
the exit of family care givers does not become a critical setback in
their recovery progress. However, the majority who live in their
families face a sudden withdrawal of all forms of support once the
care-givers are no more. The emerging contours of Indian families
as urban prototypes worsen the situation. This policy recommends
to explore ways and means of finding a solution to the question -
"Who after me". A suitable mix of all three different models of care -

17

PO


institutional, community and family- has to be identified to suit the
needs of the orphaned persons. Extending assisted living in one's
own home could be a viable option for various categories of families
across the social strata. The question of the State monitoring such
services has an element of legal obligation to ensure safety and
protect dignity of the afflicted persons living alone on low or nil
support.

5.5 Improve availability of adequately trained mental health human

5.5.1

5.5.2

5.5.3

5.5.4

resources to address the mental health needs of the community

To reduce the gap between requirement and availability of trained
mental health professionals (psychiatrists, psychiatric nurses,
psychologists, counsellors, medical psychiatric social workers,
etc.) higher number of such professionals should be trained.
Persons affected by mental health problems and their care-givers
are an important mental health human resource. At appropriate
places, this group should be used to support recovery and
disseminate information on mental health.

Integration of mental health in training programmes of other allied
fields is necessary. Anyone with a mental health issue should have
a seamless transition from a general practitioner / service to
specialised care; such should be the role and responsibilities of
each of the treating medical professionals. It is therefore imperative
that a systems perspective be the driving value / strategy in the
training of these professionals to ensure a collaborative and
informed approach to treatment and referral. All health personnel —
general or specialists should be trained on mental health to
positively influence mental health of patient and care giver.
Shortage of mental health nurses has been observed in the
country. Psychiatric nursing or mental health nursing courses such
as Masters and Diploma courses should be started to increase
supply of this trained cadre. Training in dealing with common as
also severe mental disorders is of paramount importance. A clear
defined role along with required skills should be outlined so that
nursing services are used appropriately.

The large numbers of Auxiliary Nursing Midwives should be offered
an opportunity for skill upgradation in mental health. This work
force caters to mothers and children hence their involvement in
child and adolescent mental health and mental health services for
the mothers will be useful. This is also perhaps the largest women
health work force in the country.

18

PO


5.5.5

5.5.6

5.5.7

Similarly, appropriately trained lay and community based
counsellors, psychiatric social workers, development workers,
psychologists, occupational therapists, other mental health
professionals and those trained in the social sciences should be
encouraged to understand and advocate the importance of a
healthy ecosystem and robust development programmes.

For specialised mental health services, the policy recommends
that more jobs be envisaged in the government sector which will
encourage youngsters to take such courses that lead them to jobs
in the mental health sector. There should be a cadre of specialised
mental health service providers in district hospitals.

Mental health should be recognised as everybody's business.
Training programmes must acknowledge that while the bio-
medical approach to understanding menial health problems is
undoubtedly important, there are equally important psycho-social
interventions which need to be incorporated into programmes
across all disciplines that would help alleviate distress in small
ways. This would also help broaden the scope and reach of mental
health interventions and thus help decrease stigma and position
mental health more positively.

5.6 Community participation for mental health and development

5.6.1

5.6.2

5.6.3

5.6.4

5.6.5

Remove legislative, policy and programmatic barriers to protect
rights of persons with mental illness and promote the full
participation of persons with mental illness in all areas of life
including education, housing, employmeni/ livelihood and social
welfare. In particular, there is a need to simplify procedures for
disability certification of persons with mental illness and enhancing
compensation for mental disability.

Increase availability of appropriate housing with necessary
supports for homeless and other poorly resourced persons with
mental illness living in poverty and deprivation.

Implement programmes to help persons with mental health
problems to pursue education and vocational training schemes to
help improve their chances of employment.

Include person(s) with mental health problems in all social welfare
and disability benefit programmes and make suitable modifications
to such schemes to take into account the unique requirements and
contexts of persons with mental illness.

Co-ordinated actions between different government departments

19

PO


5.6.6

5.6.7

and ministries, between government and civil society, private
sector and any other stake-holder to ensure full participation of
persons with mental illness.

Involve persons living with mental illness and care-givers in Village
Health, Sanitation, Water and Nutrition Committees (Swasthya
Gram Samiti) and in Rogi Kalyan Samiti (Patient Welfare
Committees) so that they can participate in community planning
and monitoring of the public health system and in community action
for health.

Increase the space for voice of person(s) with mental illness and
care-givers in planning and feedback of mental health services.

5.7. Research

5.7.1

5.7.2

5.7.3

5.7.4

5.7.5

5.7.6

5.7.7

Develop and implement a comprehensive research agenda for
mental health incorporating epidemiological, clinical and health
systems research together with sociological, ethnographic and
other multi-disciplinary methods, with recognition of the role of
diverse disciplines and methodologies including participatory
research methods.

Commit equitable funds for promoting mental health research, with
a target consistent with the burden of mental health problems in the
country.

Invest in building research capacity in mental health, both through
existing institutions and developing new institutions focused on
niche areas, such as people who are homeless or children's mental
health.

Foster partnerships between Centres of Excellence for Mental
Health and Medical College Departments of Psychiatry with the
District Mental Health Program and with appropriate NGOs and
research institutions to implement priority mental health research.
Develop sites in different regions of the country, around such
partnerships, which can monitor population mental health and
evaluate mental health programs.

Conduct research to evaluate the potential of traditional
knowledge, practices and alternative therapies to address mental
health problems.

Develop and facilitate mechanisms for dissemination of research
findings and for translating research findings into action at the
service delivery level.

20

PO


