National Policy on Indian Systems of Medicine & Homoeopathy-2002
I. INTRODUCTION
1.1 National Health Policy, 1983, refers to our rich, centuries - old heritage
of medical and health sciences. The Policy outlines that although vast
infrastructure is available in the Indian Systems of Medicine and
Homoeopathy for addressing health care of our people, they are under
utilized. The Policy suggested that it was necessary to initiate measures to
enable each of these various systems of medicine and health care to develop
in accordance with its genius. Simultaneously, planned efforts should be
made to integrate their services, at the appropriate levels, within specified
areas of responsibility and functioning in the over all health care delivery
systems, specially in regard to the preventive, promotive and public health
objectives. The Policy emphasized the need for a meaningful phased
integration of Indian Systems of Medicines with the modern medicines, and
also outlined the need to secure complete integration of all plans for health
and human development, particularly agriculture and food products, rural
development, education and social welfare, housing, water supply and
sanitation.
1.2 In many places, the Indian Systems of Medicine & Homoeopathy
continue to be widely used due to their accessibility, and sometimes,
because they offer the only kind of medicine within the physical and financial
reach of the patient. The Indian medicine system is also embedded in the
beliefs of a wide section of the public and continues to be an integral and
important part of their lives and for some, it is also a way of life.
1.3. Complementary and Alternative Medicine or Traditional Medicine is
rapidly growing worldwide. In India also, there is resurgence of interest in
Indian Systems of Medicine. People are becoming concerned about the
adverse effects of chemical based drugs and the escalating costs of

conventional health care. Longer life expectancy and life style related
problems have brought with them an increased risk of developing chronic,
debilitating diseases such as heart disease, cancer, diabetes and mental
disorders. Although new treatments and technologies for dealing with them
are plentiful, nonetheless more and more patients are now looking for simpler,
gentler therapies for improving the quality of life and avoiding iatrogenic
problems.
1.4 India possesses an unmatched heritage represented by its ancient
systems of medicine which are a treasure house of knowledge for both
preventive and curative healthcare. The positive features of the Indian
Systems of Medicine, namely, their diversity and flexibility; accessibility;
affordability; a broad acceptance by a section of the general public;
comparatively low cost; a low level of technological input and growing
economic value have great potentials to make them providers of health care
that the larger sections of our people need.
1.5 A huge infrastructure already exists comprising thousands of hospitals
and dispensaries, registered practitioners and twice the number of Indian
Systems of Medicine & Homoeopathy colleges as available for allopathy.
Many Post-Graduate institutions offer doctoral courses. Four research
councils and several apex scientific institutions and universities have also
contributed to clinical research, ethno-botanical surveys, pharmacological and
pharmacognostical studies on plants and drug standardization of simple and
compound ISM formulations. Clinical research studies covering the use of
ISM drugs for a range of diseases and public health problems conducted over
the last thirty years have led to many useful conclusions about the use of
single and compound ISM drugs to treat numerous intractable problems.
Although Govt. set up an independent Department in 1995 to give focus to
these issues, ISM has not been able to play a significant role in health care
delivery services for want of their legitimate involvement in public health
programmes.

2. Policy support.
2.1 The Government has reiterated that Ayurveda, Homoeopathy, Siddha,
Unani, Yoga and Naturopathy offer a wide range of preventive, promotive and
curative treatments that are both cost effective and efficacious and there is
need for ending the long neglect of these systems in our health care strategy.
Budgetary support has been augmented and fiscal incentives and
concessions that are available to modern pharmaceutical industry have been
assured to ISM sector. The resurgence of interest in Ayurveda and other
Indian Systems of Medicine in India and abroad and the opportunities created
by such interest have been well perceived in the Government.
2.2 The Central Council for Health and Family Welfare in 1999
recommended, inter-alia, that at least one physician from the Indian Systems
of Medicine & Homoeopathy (ISM & H) should be available in every primary
health care centre and that vacancies caused by non-availability of allopathic
personnel should be filled by ISM & H physicians. The Council also resolved
that specialist ISM & H treatment centres should be introduced in rural
hospitals and a wing should be created in existing state and district level
government hospitals to extend the benefits of these systems to the public. It
also resolved that expenses on treatment taken in ISM hospitals should be
recognized for reimbursement for Central Government employees. In 2001, it
further reiterated that the States must revisit the subject and identify specific
areas where ISM practitioners can be entrusted with public health functions
within the ambit of state legislations.
3. Financing ISM & H
3.1 It has been a concern for stake holders that the ISM&H gets only 2% of
the total health budget of the nation, while 98% is incurred on western modern
medicine. A corrective and promotive policy needs to be initiated so that

ISM can fully realize its potential and contribute more meaningfully to the
health services. Keeping in view the need for consolidation and creation of
infrastructure, making available ISM&H drugs and replenish supplies, reorient
the practitioners and teachers, upgrade inpatient facilities, build awareness
about the efficacy of the systems, besides setting up laboratories and
enforcement mechanisms for quality control, the allocation for Indian Systems
of Medicine & Homoeopathy sector is meagre. At state level, the allocation is
still abysmally low. Even allocated funds are either not released or utilized.
Funds are also not available adequately to set up and operationalize
Directorates of ISM which can give a direction to the policies and programmes
aimed at making use of the systems.
4. Medical Education
4.1 Medical education in Indian Systems of Medicine & Homoeopathy has
been a cause of concern. After enactment of Indian Medicines Central
Council Act, 1970 and Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973, five-and-a-
half years Under-Graduate course and three years Post-Graduate course
were introduced, provisions for adequate clinical exposure and internship
made. The number of Indian Systems of Medicine & Homoeopathy colleges
have increased phenomenally to 404. The Central Councils have
implemented various educational regulations to ensure minimum standards of
education. Depite this, there has been a mushroom growth of sub-standard
colleges causing erosion to the standards of education and harm to medical
training and practice. Liberal permission by the State Government, loopholes
in the existing Acts and weakness in the enforcement of standards of
education have contributed to this state of affairs.
5. Drug Standards, Regulation & Enforcement
5.1 Our systems of medicine are of great antiquity. The drugs have been
used for centuries. Drugs manufacture and related matters are covered under
Drugs & Cosmetics Act, 1940 and Drugs & Cosmetics Rules, 1945. A large
number of units exist in large, medium, small and tiny sectors. The safety,

efficacy, quality of drugs and their rational use have not been assured.
Though enforcement mechanism has been envisaged in the Act, and is also
in place in most of the States, implementation of the enforcement laws leaves
much to be desired. There is reluctance on the part of a large number of
manufacturers to adhere to good manufacturing practices. Preparation of
formularies and pharmacopoeial standards have been speeded up but a lot is
yet to be completed. There is no assurance whatsoever that Formularies and
Pharmacopoeial standards are being followed by the Indian Systems of
Medicine & Homoeopathy drug manufacturers.
6. Medicinal Plants
6.1 Indian Systems of Medicine & Homoeopathy use predominantly plant
materials for the preparation of their drugs. 8000 plants are stated to have
medicinal properties although 500 of them are generally used. Most of these
plants grow in the wild as natural component of vegetation of a particular
region and the supply chain is carried out informally. This traditional base is
shrinking due to over exploitation, unsustainable practices, biodegradation
and population pressure. There are restrictions on extraction and
procurement from the wild. The trade is secretive and exploitative leading to
unsustainable practices in the quest for profit. In the absence of a scientific
system for collection and fostering regeneration of such plants, several
species have either been completely lost or become endangered. Industry
constantly faces the problem of raw material supply and its quality.
Adulteration and substitution of drugs is reported to be rampant in a near
absence of assured supply of quality raw drugs and an enforcement system.
7. The ISM Industry
7.1 The ISM Industry has not been able to grow and develop optimally
during the last five decades. Whatever growth has been achieved has been
largely due to the industry's own initiative, undertaking its own Research and
Development over the years. No special funding or incentives have been
extended to this sector to help it realize its potential. The ISM industry has

neither been declared a priority industry nor a green industry. Special
packages for this sector to strengthen it and expand its outreach has not been
addressed as a result it would be correct to call this sector nascent and in dire
need of rejuvenation.
8. Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) of ISM
8.1 Our wealth of knowledge on formulations and medicinal uses of plants
available in ancient texts and treatises have been attracting foreign interest
and a large number of such medicinal uses have been patented by them
claiming as innovations though these are already available in the public
domain and therefore can not be patented. This has happened as such
knowledge is not available in easily accessible form and in the language
generally used by the patent examiners overseas. This has harmed our
national interest as the process for retrieval and contesting patents is very
costly and time consuming which we can ill-afford.
9. Revitalization of Local Health Traditions
9.1 In addition to the documented knowledge, indigenous traditional
medical knowledge available with the individuals, communities, tribals have
not been fully tapped, documented and validated. Such knowledge over the
years gets eroded causing irreversible harm. Our Research Councils have
documented over 10,000 such folk medicine but tens of thousands of such
knowledge remain to be documented. The providers of such knowledge
have not been given due acknowledgement, financial benefit and support to
patent their knowledge.
10. Medical Tourism and Export of ISM Practitioners
10.1 The interest in our systems overseas for gentler and plant based
treatment has been growing rapidly. More than that certain therapies are
becoming extremely popular and tourists/visitors come to India for such
therapies like Panchkarma and Yoga. Medical tourism not only popularises
our system but offers good avenue for foreign exchange earning. Little has

been done to create a chain of Panchkarma Centres and establish centres of
excellence for yoga therapy, meditation and teaching.
11. Ancient Medical Manuscripts
11.1 There is at present no complete catalogue of Indian medical
manuscripts which lie scattered in oriental libraries and private custody not
only in India but also in other parts of the World. In India, ancient
manuscripts are often found in a poor condition with the families of the old
Vaidyas and non-descript libraries. This knowledge will be lost forever
unless remedial action is taken urgently. Their retrieval for posterity is
important for the preservation of this ancient wisdom and experience which
will provide a wealth of knowledge and impetus to research and clinical
application. Government has not implemented any scheme for the systematic
collection and preservation of this information and the selective utilization of
this knowledge This intervention brooks no delay.
12. Research in ISM
12.1 Our systems have been practised over centuries, and some of these
are treatment, therapies and drugs have unbroken traditions of acceptance
and practice. Whereas it is not desirable to subject all these to validation on
modern scientific parameters, the need for fundamental, clinical and drugs
research can hardly be over emphasized. Evidence for safety and efficacy is
being demanded by the users. The Research Councils have been conducting
research for the last 30 years, yet a lot remains to be done. Research has not
kept pace with the times, it has not been re-oriented and prioritized.
13. Access to information
13.1 The medical profession and the Western educated public has been
relatively restrictive in its approach to ISM, limiting the extent to which ISM
physicians can employ their drugs and therapies and the extent to which the
practitioners can “encroach” on areas falling within the purview of mainstream
medicine.

13.2 The modern pharmaceutical industry has influenced health policy and
health care systems the world over and India is no exception. The deep
interest in the biomedical model of health has often been prompted by
considerations which are not always rooted in concern for the health of
citizens. Consumers are systematically led into believing that the biomedical
model and its treatment options are the only alternatives and unfortunately
most people are not willing to look beyond this model, leaving little attention
and space for Indian Systems of Medicine and health care options, often
shown to be both cost effective and enduring. These conflicts of interest and
ethical dilemmas in a health care system, which advocates freedom of choice,
have not been addressed.
14. Veterinary Medicine
14.1 Indian medicine is not reflected merely in the treatment of human
beings but other important dimensions like veterinary medicine are addressed
in detail through these systems. This represents a whole new spectrum of
knowledge and opportunity. This area has not been exploited at all.
15. OBJECTIVES
The basic objectives of this Policy are :
(a) To promote good health and expand the outreach of health care to our
people, particularly those not provided health cover, through
preventive, promotive, mitigating and curative intervention through
ISM&H.
(b) To improve the quality of teachers and clinicians by revising curricula to
contemporary relevance and researchers by creating model institutions
and Centres of Excellence and extending assistance for creating
infrastructural facilities.
( c) To ensure affordable ISM&H services & drugs which are safe and
efficacious.

(d) To facilitate availability of raw drugs which are authentic and contain
essential components as required under pharmacopoeial standards to
help improve quality of drugs, for domestic consumption and export.
(e) Integrate ISM&H in health care delivery system and National
Programmes and ensure optimal use of the vast infrastructure of
hospitals, dispensaries and physicians.
(f) Re-orient and prioritize research in ISM&H to gradually validate therapy
and drugs to address in particular the chronic and new life style related
emerging diseases.
(g) Create awareness about the strengths of these systems in India and
abroad and sensitize other stakeholders and providers of health.
(h) To provide full opportunity for the growth and development of these
systems and utilization of the potentiality, strength and revival of their
glory.
16. STRATEGIES
The strategies to achieve the objectives through policy interventions
and support operational measures and monitoring are delineated as under :-
16.1. Education
(a) Legislative measures would be taken to regulate starting of a new
college, increase in intake and introduction of new course of study.
Establishment of model colleges and Centres of Excellence of ISM&H
would be encouraged. The course curriculae would be reviewed and
revised to weed out unnecessary teaching materials; incorporate what
is relevant keeping in view present requirements, including research
achievements; the component of modern medicine would be reduced;
and study of Sanskrit in Ayurveda discipline and Urdu and Persian in
Unani discipline would be incorporated in the curriculae. Nursing and
Pharmacy education would be introduced and regulated through
existing or new regulatory councils. A separate regulatory council for
Yoga and Naturopathy would be set up. Schemes for providing

vocational training for housewives, dais, nurses, etc., and course for
dietitians based on Ayurvedic and naturopathy approach to food and
nutrition would also be developed. National Institutes would be made
fully functional as Centres of Excellence.
(b) States would be encouraged to introduce separate examinations for
entry to Undergraduate courses of the Indian Systems of Medicine &
Homoeopathy and Post-graduate institutions would be encouraged to
start a unified admissions test for PG courses of Ayurveda and Unani
to bring about uniformity in standards and foster healthy competition
and recognition of merit.
( c) Re-orientation training of physicians and teachers would be made
compulsory for the renewal of their registration with the registering
councils.
(d) Central Government would set up an accredition system whereby silver
and platinum standards would be given to ISM&H colleges to inspire
students and teachers to aspire for higher standards of teaching,
clinical exposure & research and thereby to achieve excellence
16.2 Research
(a) Priority would be accorded to research covering clinical trials,
pharmacology, toxicology, standardization and study of pharmacology
kinetics in respect of already identified areas of strength. The research
areas would be prioritised keeping in view the strengths of the systems
and contemporary relevance giving due emphasis on preventive and
promotive aspects.
(b) Other important areas of research would include :
(i) Research on fundamental principles of ISM&H.
(ii) Drug research to establish efficacy and safety of ISM medicine
to be accelerated by adopting rapid screening of herbs invivo or
invitro in experimental settings.
(iii) Disease oriented clinical drug research following “reverse
pharmacology approach”.

(iv) Identification and evaluation of promising and widely accepted
practices and skills of traditional healers in rural and tribal areas.
(v) Revival of ancient literature – survey, collection, transcription/
translation, editing and publication of classical literature and text
books on ISM.
16.3 Medicinal Plants
(a) The Medicinal Plants Board would address all issues connected with
conservation and sustainable use of medicinal plants leading to
remunerative farming, regulation of medicinal farms and conservation
of bio-diversity. Priority would be given to encourage cultivation of 28
medicinal plants recommended for cultivation by Expert Committees in
the first instance. To receive the benefit of financial support, all
schemes would have to provide proper buy-back arrangements.
(b) Issues relating to import-export would be addressed through the
identification of markets, market segmentation, simplifying import and
export procedures.
( c) Research studies would be introduced for reproductive systems of
plants, their distribution on post harvest management, shelf-life and
storage conditions.
(d) Encouragement would be given for R&D on rare and endangered
plants for increasing bio-chemical substances, development of herbal
formulations, conservation of germplasm of important medicinal plants.
More Gene Banks would be encouraged to be set up.
(e) An Export Authority would be established for export of medicinal plants
and products with capability for proper authentication and fulfillment of
quality, safety requirements including packing, testing, fumigation,
storage requirements.
(f) Medicinal Plants Board would acquire Statutory status to be able to
regulate registration of farmers and cooperative societies,
transportation, marketing of medicinal plants and proper procurement
and supply to pharmaceutical industry.

16.4 Intellectual Property Rights & Patents
(a) Protection of India’s traditional medicinal knowledge would be
undertaken through a progressive creation of a Digital Library for each
system and eventually for uncodified knowledge leading to innovation
and good health outcomes.
(b) Relevant International fora would be addressed about the need for fair
and equitable sharing of benefits to the custodians of the knowledge
and a system of compensating the originators of such knowledge
introduced.
( c) TRIPS has provided the signatory countries the freedom to choose
intellectual property protection of plant varieties either under a patent
regime or a sui generis system or a combination thereof. A sui generis
system will be set up to provide grassroots innovators of plant based
knowledge an incentive to disclose knowledge.
16.5 Integration of ISM & H and National Health Care Programmes and
Delivery System.
(a) Efforts would be made to integrate and mainstream ISM&H in health
care delivery systems including National Programmes.
(b) A range of options for utilization of ISM & H manpower in the health
care delivery system would be developed by assigning specific goal
oriented role and responsibility to the ISM work-force. An ISM&H wing
would be encouraged and supported at the primary health care level.
( c) States would be encouraged to reenact or modify laws governing the
practice of modern medicine by ISM practitioners so that there is clarity
of the subject.
(d) Referral ISM hospitals in the country would be renovated, modernized
and upgraded to provide the full range of ISM treatment. Identification
of the hospitals would be made according to current availability of
motivated staff, OPD & IPD attendance and locational advantages.

(e) At the PHC and district hospital level, Central Government would
encourage the setting up of speciality centres and ISM clinics & funds
would be provided centrally for drugs listed in the Essential Drug Lists
for Ayurveda, Unani and Homeopathy Medicine on a declining scale
for 5 years to increase choice and consumer awareness about the
benefits of ISM.
(f) Central government would assist speciality hospitals of allopathy who
wish to establish Panchkarma and Ksharshutra facilities for the
treatment of neurological disorders, musculo-skeletal problems as well
as ambulatory treatment of fistula in ano, bronchial asthma and
dermatological problems.
(g) Private allopathic hospitals would be encouraged to set up specialist
treatment centres of ISM&H and the hiring charges of
Vaidyas/Hakims/Homoeopaths reimbursed to such hospitals entering
into research collaboration protocols.
(h) States would be encouraged to consolidate the ISM infrastructure and
raise the salary and social/professional status of ISM practitioners to
encourage inflow of talent and an enhanced work-culture. The aim
would be to provide parity with the Central Government pattern which
has established equivalence/relativities with the allopathic profession.
16.6 Drug Standardization and Quality Control
(a) All Pharmacopoeial work related to Ayurveda, Unani, Siddha and
Homoeopathy drugs would be completed by 2005. Enforcement
mechanism will be activised.
(b) Industry would be encouraged to make use of Quality Certification
Scheme being introduced by the Department for batch-by-batch
testing.
( c) Financial support would be given for acquisition of ISO 9000
certification by ISM industry.

(d) New Legislation covering a vast range of nutraceuticals and food
supplements which are neither covered by the drug licencing nor food
licencing would be introduced.
(e) Quality Control Centres would be set up or recognized on a Regional
basis to standardize the in-process quality control of ISM products and
to modernize traditional processes without changing the concepts of
ISM. States would be advised to augment facilities for drugs
manufacture and testing of the drugs.
(f) Drugs & Cosmetics Act would be amended to also cover grant of
manufacturing licences for intermediate or partially processed herbal
mixes and pharmacopoeial standards evolved for these intermediaries.
16.7 ISM Industry
(a) ISM industry would be given priority industry status and declared a
green industry. Efforts would be made to secure fiscal incentives and
tax concessions to ISM industry within overall taxation policy to make
them viable and competitive. They would be encouraged to adopt
modern dosage form and follow reasonable shelf-life. Whereas use of
classical preparations would be encouraged, guidelines would be
framed for patent and proprietary medicines and manufacturers would
be expected to have efficacy and safety studies conducted before
licenses are granted for new Patent Proprietary medicines.
16.8 Revitalization of Local Health Traditions
(a) Revitalization of folk health traditions related to birth attendants, herbal
healers, bone settlers, Visha healers etc., would figure in the agenda of
the ISM sector to be selectively identified, reinforced, validated and
then propagated for use in a wider community.
16.9 Home Remedy Kits

(a) A scheme for supply of identified medicine in Home Remedy Kits would
be implemented.
16.10 Veterinary Medicine
(a) The definition of Ayurvedic medicines under the Drugs & Cosmetics
Act include veterinary medicines. There are several authentic books of
Ayurveda dealing with veterinary medicines such as Nakul Samhita,
Palkapya Shastra, Go Ayurveda, Hasti Ayurveda, Baj Nama etc.
Central Government will encourage two institutions in the 10th Plan for
introducing courses and undertaking documentation of the classical
books in various languages. Homoeopathy also has effective
treatment for care of animals and a similar approach would be
followed.
16.11 Operational Use of ISM in Reproductive & Child Health (RCH ).
(a) Eleven areas have been identified where the Ayurvedic herbs would be
useful for ante-natal, intra-natal, post-natal and neo-natal care. This
concept would be taken forward to cover the use of Unani and
Homoeopathic drugs also. The identified areas include menstruation,
preparation for delivery, vomiting in pregnancy, loss of appetite,
constipation, gaseous distention, acidity & diarrhea, treatment of
oedema, insomnia, anemia, piles, delivery and its management and the
care of the new born. In the areas of neo-natal and child health, the
identified areas would be care of the new born, precautions in early
infancy, management of diarrhea, constipation, worm infestation in
children. The entire approach would be traditional and based upon
operational research study findings.
16.12 Financing ISM
(a) ISM shares only 2-4% of the National Health Budget. This should be
raised to 10% of the total health plan at the Central level and further
growth should be designed to climb at the rate of 5% in every Five

Year Plan. For the first five years of the New Policy, Central
Government will directly provide or earmark budgets for consolidation
of infrastructure, purchase of drugs and support for opening speciality
clinics and ISM services.
16.13 Administration of the ISM Sector
(a) Although there are 18 Directorates of ISM, these are not functioning
independently and purposefully in most places. To harness the
growing importance of ISM nationally and globally, there is a need for
political, administrative and financial structures and systems to
implement the policies. There is a need to post state level Secretaries
and Directors of ISM & H, establish Directorates in the major states of
the country which will facilitate implementation of the programmes.
The managerial infrastructure at district and block levels will be
strengthened by the States through earmarked outlays.
16.14 Developments of Special Areas – North East & New States
(a) North Eastern States, rich in flora and fauna, are lacking in
infrastructure and knowledge about ISM as it prevails in other parts of
India. Utilization of medicinal plants, identification of tribal medical
practices, setting up of dispensaries and need based teaching
institutions for ISM would be encouraged.
(b) Some of the States like Uttaranchal, Chattisgarh and Jharkhand have a
wealth of medicinal plants but are lacking in requisite infrastructure and
capacity to formulate projects. Central Government will assist these
States on priority to avail of the benefits of Medicinal Plant Sector
Schemes.
16.15 Medical Tourism
(a) Facilities for Panchakarma and Yoga would be encouraged to be
offered in hotels. Road Shows would be organized abroad by
providing services of Vaids and Hakims and Yoga demonstration.

Participation in fairs, conferences and tourism events would be
supported.
(b) Encouragement would be given to a few government hotels in the
states to promote Panchakarma and Yoga.
( c) ISM parks would be developed in collaboration with State Tourism
authorities.
(d) A scheme for accreditation of Panchakarma & Yoga facilities would be
introduced.
16.16 Inter-Sectoral Co-operation
(a) Linkages would be established with Departments of Culture, Tourism,
Labour(ESI), Railways, Posts, Confederation of Indian Industry (CII),
Association of Chamber of Commerce & Industry (ASSOCHAM),
Federation of Indian Chamber of Commerce & Industry (FICCI),
Women & Child Development, Rural Development, Tribal Affairs to
promote and propagate the use of ISM&H through the establishment of
clinics or by allowing reimbursement of treatment charges.
(b) Schemes for growing medicinal plants for production and sale of plant-
based products including herbal tea through women’s groups and tribal
agencies would be encouraged.
( c) The possibility of introducing knowledge relating to the properties of
medicinal plants and preparation of simple home remedies from ISM in
the school curriculum, would be explored and taken forward.
(d) Naturopathy diets, Yogic exercise would be encouraged in schools,
colleges and offices.
16.17 Exposing the Foreign and Indian Modern Graduates to Indian
Systems of Medicine (ISM)

Keeping in view the global interest in understanding ISM concepts and
practices:-
(a) Modules will be formulated for introducing Ayurveda and Yoga to
medical schools and institutions abroad.
( b) Courses of long duration say one year to two years should be started
for allopathic doctors from India and abroad who are interested in
learning about Ayurveda. A package of introductory lectures would be
suggested to be given during the regular medical course for foreign
students. At PG and Doctorate level, scholarships would be given to
undertake medical research on ISM.
16.18 Building Awareness
(a) Programmes on the utility and effectiveness of ISM&H would be
launched through the electronic and print media.
(b) Special incentives would be given to colleges and groups of students
who come up with innovative ideas for popularizing ISM&H. Students
of Management and Social Science courses would be offered
internships to work on popularizing and marketing ISM&H.
( c) A significant portion of the budget would be assigned for IEC on
healthy life styles and preventive health through ISM&H approaches. NGOs
would be used for popularizing Yoga in primary schools, residential colonies
and in industrial units.