Government of India
Ministry of Urban Development
NatioNal Policy oN Faecal Sludge
aNd SePtage MaNageMeNt (FSSM)
February 2017

NatioNal Policy oN Faecal Sludge aNd SePtage MaNageMeNt (FSSM)
2

3
FOReWORD
Shri M Venkaiah naidu
Minister of Urban Development, Housing & Urban
Poverty Alleviation and Parliamentary Affairs
On 2nd October 2014, the Government of India launched the Swachh Bharat Mission towards achieving
a Clean and Open Defecation Free India by 2019. The mission has been successful in bringing to the
fore issues in the areas of sanitation and solid waste management. As the mission has entered its third
year, significant progress has been made across the 4041 cities/towns with innovative approaches being
adopted to not only improve service delivery but also make the mission a Jan Andolan. This is reflected
in the physical progress achieved under the mission until now which includes construction of 29,18,669
individual household toilets and 1,10,665 Community & Public Toilets across all cities/towns.
With 475 cities certified Open Defecation Free, it is equally critical to put our efforts towards the safe
collection, treatment and disposal of all human waste that is collected from onsite sanitation systems
such as septic tanks, in order to achieve safe sustainable sanitation for all.
To address this issue, my Ministry is committed to helping states and cities in India to make rapid
improvements in managing their faecal sludge and has launched the Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and
Urban Transformation, which focuses on the provision of sewerage facilities and septage management
in 500 cities across the country. States and cities have been urged to include an FSSM plan as part
of their AMRUT State Level Implementation Plans. Further, it is heartening to see cities taking the next
step to become ODF+ by taking up initiatives in the area of FSSM, as part of the Swachh Bharat Mission.
The states of Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra and Odisha have already released state level Septage Management
policies to ensure proper FSSM in their respective cities and I urge other states to lead by example.
To put our best efforts forward to implement faecal sludge management initiatives, there are a variety of
roles that multiple stakeholders must play. While city officials have the mandate to ensure service provision
and implementation partners can share the technical expertise, there is also an opportunity for the private
sector to provide FSSM services in urban India. Only through such a collaborative multi-stakeholder
approach can we make India Swacch and open defecation free (ODF).

NatioNal Policy oN Faecal Sludge aNd SePtage MaNageMeNt (FSSM)
4
FOReWORD
Shri rao inderjit Singh
Minister of State, Ministry of Urban Development
Government of India
expansion in the coverage of sanitation services in urban India is imperative citing the associated negative
externalities within the health domain and beyond. While the objective of making the country open
defecation free by the year 2018 is on track under Governments’ mutually reinforcing schemes like Swacch
Bharat Mission (SBM) and Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT), more that
65% of household toilets are beyond the coverage of sewerage network.
Though the efforts are ongoing to expand the sewerage network in Indian cities, keeping in view the
current resource endowments it is imperative to explore decentralized solutions. It gives me immense
pleasure to introduce the National Policy on Faecal Sludge and Septage Management that induces and
sensitizes national, state and local bodies to decentralized sanitation approaches, and propositions such
approaches as a viable alternative to centralized sewerage systems where appropriate.
Since the States have the responsibility of the implementation of this policy, considerable flexibility is
granted to states to develop their own models to further the cause of FSSM. The National Policy, in this
context, acts as a guiding document for the States by setting the context, priorities and direction for states
and cities to ensure proper implementation of FSSM across urban India.
I am optimistic that with the introduction of this policy we would further strengthen the implementation
effort nationally culminating towards achievement of envisaged targets under SBM and AMRUT.

5
PReFACe
Shri rajiV gauba
Secretary, Urbvan Development
Sanitation in India is key to achieving improved public health and enhanced socio-economic outcomes.
To achieve this objective, Ministry of Urban Development has launched two key schemes namely,
Swachh Bharat Mission (SBM) and Atal Mission for Rejuvenation & Urban Transformation (AMRUT). While
SBM aims to end open defecation by universalizing construction and use of toilets, AMRUT is aimed at
strengthening the sewerage and water supply network of the country. Both schemes aim to holistically
address the existing gaps under the sanitation value chain in India.
At present, the penetration of sewerage systems is low in the country and more than 45% of urban Indian
households are dependent on On-Site Sanitation (OSS) systems. Thus, till the time the Government’s
vision of 100% sewerage universalization is achieved, it is felt that faecal sludge output needs to be
managed in an environmentally safe and sustainable manner using complementary and alternative
methods of treatment.
In view of this, the Ministry of Urban Development is launching the National Policy on Faecal Sludge and
Septage Management (FSSM) to facilitate nationwide implementation of FSSM in India. The key objective
of this policy document is to set the context, priorities and direction for states and cities in this regard.
It is hoped that this policy will help in generating awareness and furthering the cause of FSSM for achieving
safe and sustainable sanitation for urban India.

NatioNal Policy oN Faecal Sludge aNd SePtage MaNageMeNt (FSSM)
6

7
CONTeNTS
1. Terminology 9
2. Introduction 10
2.1. existing Situation 10
2.2. Need for FSSM Policy 10
2.3. Gaps and Issues in Urban Sanitation 12
~ Access 12
~ Septage Collection and Conveyance 12
~ Treatment and Disposal 13
~ Poor Awareness 13
~ Fragmented Institutional Roles and Responsibilities 13
~ Lack of an Integrated City-Wide Approach 13
~ Gender Sensitive Gap: 13
2.4. National Declaration on FSSM 14
2.5. FSSM International Perspective 14
3. Objectives and Scope 16
3.1. Vision 16
3.2. Objectives 16
3.3. Specific Milestones 16
3.3.1. Leveraging FSSM to Achieve 100% Access to Safe Sanitation 16
3.3.2. Achieving Integrated Citywide Sanitation: Mainstreaming Sanitation 17
3.3.3. Sanitary and Safe Disposal 17
3.3.4. Awareness Generation and Behaviour Change 17
3.4. Scope 18

NatioNal Policy oN Faecal Sludge aNd SePtage MaNageMeNt (FSSM)
8
4. Legislative and Regulatory Context 19
4.1. Central Laws and Rules 19
5. Roles and Responsibilities 20
6. Implementation Approach 22
6.1. State-Level Implementation Strategy 22
6.2. ULB Level Implementation Plan 24
7. Technological Option 25
8. Financing Plan 25
9. Monitoring & evaluation 26
10. Capacity Building & Training 26
11. expected Outcomes 27
LiSt of figureS
Figure 1: Status of Sanitation in Urban India 11
Figure 2: Implementation Process 22
LiSt of tabLeS
Table 1: Summary of Roles and Responsibilities 20
annexureS
Annexure 1 : Framework for Preparation of State Level FSSM Plan 28
Annexure 2 : D raft San-Benchmark Framework
for Revised Service Level Benchmark for Sanitation 31
Annexure 3 : Technological Options 32
References 34

9
1 TeRMINOLOGy
faecal Sludge: “Faecal Sludge” is raw or The effluent from the septic tank can be collected
partially digested, in a slurry or semisolid form, the in a network of drains and/or sewers and treated
collection, storage or treatment of combinations of in a treatment plant designed appropriately. The
excreta and black water, with or without grey water. accumulating sludge at the bottom of the septic
It is the solid or settled contents of pit latrines and tank however, has to be also removed and treated
septic tanks. The physical, chemical and biological once it has reached the designed depth or at
qualities of faecal sludge are influenced by the the end of the designed desludging frequency
duration of storage, temperature, soil condition, whichever occurs earlier. Such a removal is
and intrusion of groundwater or surface water in possible only by trucks. While sucking out the
septic tanks or pits, performance of septic tanks, sludge, the liquid in the septic tank will also be
and tank emptying technology and pattern. sucked out. Such a mixture is referred to as
septage.
Faecal sludge is the solid or settled contents of pit
latrines and septic tanks. Faecal sludge (FS) comes Septic tank: An underground tank that treats
from onsite sanitation systems. examples of onsite sewage by a combination of solids settling
technologies include pit latrines, non-sewered and anaerobic digestion. The effluents may be
public ablution blocks, septic tanks, aqua privies, discharged into soak pits or small-bore sewers,
and dry toilets. and the solids have to be pumped out periodically.
Septage: “Septage” is the liquid and solid material Sewage: Sewage is defined as the wastewater
that is pumped from a septic tank, cesspool, containing human body waste matter (faeces
or such onsite treatment facility after it has and urine etc), either dissolved or undissolved,
accumulated over a period of time. Usually, discharged from toilets and other receptacles
septic tank retains 60% - 70% of the solids, oil, intended to receive or retain such human body
and grease that enter it. The scum accumulates wastes. The effluent coming out of septic tanks
on the top and the sludge settles to the bottom or any such facility is also sewage.
comprising 20% - 50% of the total septic tank
volume when pumped. Offensive odour and Sewerage System: The underground conduit for
appearance are the most prominent characteristics the collection of sewage is called Sewer. A network
of Septage. It is a host of many disease-causing of sewer appurtenances intended for the collection
organisms along with the contamination of and conveyance of sewage generated from each
significant level of grease, grit, hair, and debris. of the properties to a sewage pumping station
for pumping to sewage treatment plant for further
Septage is the combination of scum, sludge, and treatment and disposal is called sewerage system.
liquid that accumulates in septic tanks.

NatioNal Policy oN Faecal Sludge aNd SePtage MaNageMeNt (FSSM)
10
2 INTRODUCTION
2.1. exiSting Situation
and are unlikely to be covered by centralised
sewerage systems in the near future.
According to Census 2011, India’s urban
population is 377 million or 31% of the total
2.2. need for fSSM PoLicy
population, which is expected to increase to
600 million by 2031. The Census 2011 also
According to the data released in the report
showed that in 4,041 statutory towns, 7.90 million
“Inventorization of Sewage treatment plants, 2015”
households (HHs) do not have access to toilets and
by the Central Pollution Control Board, out of the
defecate in the opena1. Under the Swachh Bharat
816 municipal sewage treatment plants (STPs)
Mission (SBM), it is envisaged that nearly 80% of
listed across India, 522 are operational (only 64%
these 7.90 million HHs (or nearly 6.3 million HHs)
are functioning), 79 STPs are Non Operational,
will meet their sanitation needs through newly-built
145 STPs are under construction and 70 STPs are
individual household toilet (IHHT) and the remaining
proposed. The treatment capacity that is available
20% (or nearly 1.6 million HHs) will rely on existing
is only for 37% of the total 62,000 MLD (million
or newly-built community toilets. Weak sanitation
litres per day) of human waste that is generated
has significant health costs and untreated faecal
in urban India.
sludge and septage from cities is the single biggest
source of water resource pollution in India. Human
Currently on-site pit latrines and septic tanks
waste has clearly been identified as the leading
account for a substantial proportion of toilets in
polluter of water sources in India, causing a host of
urban India – over 47% of urban Indian households
diseases including diarrhoea, agricultural-produce
depend on onsite facilities (Census 2011) and
contamination and environmental degradation.
this proportion is increasing. Further, as urban
households without toilets obtain facilities over the
India’s bigger cities have large, centralized
next few years under SBM, it is likely that many
sewerage systems with vast underground
will acquire on-site arrangements like pit latrines
pipelines, pumping stations and huge treatment
and septic tanks in cities at locations where
plants. These systems are expensive to build and
sewerage systems are not available. Thus, while
even more expensive to operate effectively, as they
the containment of human waste will be largely
require continuous power, a large amount of water,
achieved under SBM, its treatment still poses
skilled operators and extensive electro-mechanical
a huge challenge.
maintenance. It is for this reason that India’s
7,000+ small towns do not have such systems
In the absence of adequate safe and sustainable
sanitation, many Indian cities are already suffering
the consequences, in the form of health ailments
1 SBM Urban Guidelines, Ministry of Urban Development,
Government of India and serious pollution of water and soil resources.

11
figure 1: StatuS of Sanitation in urban india
availability of toilets* types of Sanitation Facility* treatment#
Open Defecation 12.6% None 12.6%
Others 9.4%
Community 6%
Toilets Pit Toilets 7.1%
62.5%
Partial/
Septic
38.2% No Treatment
Tanks
Household
Toilets
81.4%
Sewerage
32.7%
37.5%
STP Facility
Access to toilets for Types of Sanitation Facility Status of wastewater treatment
HH in urban India by HH in Urban India in urban India (MLD)
Source: * Census of India 2011; # CPCB, Inventoriazation of STPs (2015)
In contrast with the large proportion of on-site desludging equipment or there are private players
sanitation (OSS) systems, limited attention has providing cleaning services but the supply of
been accorded to proper construction and desludging services is far from adequate. In many
maintenance of OSS and the management instances faecal sludge and septage is dumped in
and safe disposal of faecal sludge and septage drains and open areas posing considerable health
from such septic tanks and pit latrines. While and environmental risks. Sanitary workers also
construction standards have been codified by work in hazardous conditions to clean OSS pits
the Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS), the actual and tanks sometime without adequate protective
construction was largely left to households to gear and equipment. In most Indian cities, there
manage – in practice, the installations are subject is limited data and information on the types and
to local practices and considerable variations are number of OSS toilets and septage disposal
observed. In many instances for example, soak- systems and practices.
away or drain fields are not provided.
The problem of Faecal sludge and septage /
Limited capacities and resources with Urban Local sewerage must be addressed in a holistic manner,
Bodies (ULBs) also resulted in little regulation of with a strategy that provides for minimum needs
maintenance and cleaning of septic tanks and and is appropriate and affordable for all areas,
pits – in many cases, households do not report considering the local situation. It must also address
cleaning for a number of years. Some ULBs have the enablers in the form of suitable regulation

NatioNal Policy oN Faecal Sludge aNd SePtage MaNageMeNt (FSSM)
12
and institutional framework, capacity building and Septage collection and conveyance: Regular
education and awareness among all stakeholders. cleaning of septic tanks through a systematic
This policy seeks to address the efficiency of extraction and collection procedure is essential
systems in place for onsite sanitation whereof the to check environmental pollution. The frequency
faecal sludge output needs to be managed in an of cleaning is determined by the desired
environmentally safe manner including the proper performance of the OSS system for the local
engineering design, construction and maintenance conditions. For example, if the septic tank is
of septic tank systems, pit latrines and such other soaking away into the ground, with no ground
systems generating faecal sludge. water issues, frequency of emptying can be less.
On the other hand, if effluent is overflowing to
surface drain, more regular emptying may be
2.3. gaPS and iSSueS in urban
required to prevent sludge overflow. Notably,
Sanitation
the following issues create barriers to regular tank
cleaning, and septage collection:
While onsite sanitation is prevalent in cities, there
are major gaps in its implementation across the
• Illegal Manual scavenging: Though a specific
sanitation service chain. While the gaps and
act has been passed against Manual Scavenging,
consequences of lack of access to toilets are well
(The Prohibition of employment as Manual
reported, those relating to septage collection,
Scavengers and their Rehabilitation Act, 2013),
conveyance and treatment remain largely unknown
social and cultural acceptance of such practices
and unaddressed by most, if not all, municipal
act against formal and systematic methods
bodies and most state governments. even in the
of cleaning tanks.
general discourse, this major health hazard is not
well understood or talked about!
• No / Limited access to tanks: Septic tanks
access: Issues in access to toilets arise due are often placed under toilets, or are sealed,
to households having financial issues and space or cemented over, making it difficult to access
crunch for constructing individual toilets. This them for cleaning/ emptying which
leads to members of households without toilets dis-incentivizes their frequent cleaning.
practicing open defecation2. There are also
significant cultural and social barriers (issues • Inappropriate tank sizing & design: Septic
around perceptions of pollution and caste; and tanks connected to individual toilets are often
a general social acceptance of open defecation oversized due to lack of awareness among
that prevents households from investing in safe construction contractors about the design
sanitation and its universal and consistent use – norms. These tanks do not meet the standards
in both urban and rural areas. This behavioural prescribed in the National Building Code, the
aspect is one of the significant reasons why India Indian Standard Codes and the CPHeeO3
has such high rates of open defecation compared Manual. As a result, households typically notice
to other even poorer and less developed countries
in Africa and in Asia.
3 The Central Public Health and Environmental Engineering
Organization (CPHEEO) is the technical wing of the MoUD and
deals with matters related to urban water supply and sanitation
2 Swacchta Status Report - NSSO http://cpheeo.nic.in/Onsite%20Sanitation/suk/cha/Chap1-6.pdf

13
any water body available, and often these sites are
the need for cleaning once the tanks fill up, and
some distance away from the main city.
call for emptying services.
Poor awareness: Faecal Sludge and septage
In many cases, where households do not
management has been accorded low priority and
understand the utility of a septic tank as a requisite
there is poor awareness about its inherent linkages
pre-treatment unit, it merely acts as a large
with public health.
containment tank, with overflow to the drains.
Masons who construct these, often oversize
fragmented institutional roles and
them at the request of the households. This
responsibilities: There are considerable
leads to extraction and emptying being done at
gaps and overlaps in institutional roles and
very infrequent levels (once in 10-15 years). The
responsibilities at the national, state, and city levels.
overflow is often just connected to available open
drains instead of a proper soak pit, making entire
Lack of an integrated city-wide approach:
drain surroundings a health hazard.
Faecal Sludge and septage management
investments are currently planned in a piece-meal
• Lack of infrastructure, and a regulated
manner and do not take into account the full cycle
schedule for cleaning: ULBs are often faced
of safe confinement, treatment and safe disposal.
with financial and personnel constraints in
providing recommended service levels to
Limited technology choices: Technologies have
households - for example, insufficient suction
been focussed and the disposal techniques are
emptier trucks, trained human resource, safety
not environmental friendly no cost-effective, and
equipment, etc. to ensure regular cleaning/
sustainable investments for safe management and
emptying of septic tanks.
disposal has been thought off on a large scale.
• Lack of formal private players: The sector is
gender Sensitive gap: The burden of poor
dominated by informal small-scale contractors
sanitation (compounded by the lack of FSSM
that lead to difficulty in monitoring of the process
services) disproportionately affects women,
that they follow for emptying and disposal.
especially the urban poor, because this falls along
Domination by informal players also makes it
established fault-lines of malnutrition and family
harder to institutionalize best practices and
health caregiving. This policy, therefore, will
regulations, which prevents establishment of
promote gender mainstreaming in FSSM where
norms around scheduled and safe cleaning.
women are seen as active agents and participants
of change, not merely as recipients or victims
treatment and disposal: Typically, most
of policies. The economic Survey Report (2016-
small-medium towns and cities lack adequate
17) of the Finance Ministry indicates the adverse
centralized/ decentralized facilities and designated
impact of lack of sustainable sanitation on health
sites for sewage and for septage treatment and
of women and impedes in cognitive development
disposal. As a result, all sewage is dumped without
of girls and infants.
treatment into the rivers, while untreated sludge
and septage is disposed of in a dumping ground/

NatioNal Policy oN Faecal Sludge aNd SePtage MaNageMeNt (FSSM)
14
2.4. nationaL decLaration on fSSM Policy is being promulgated to address the gaps
and provide the necessary directions to diverse
MoUD recognizes that the end objectives and stakeholders engaged in provision of FSSM
corresponding benefits of SBM cannot be services.
achieved without proper management of faecal
sludge and septage across the sanitation service
2.5. fSSM internationaL PerSPectiVe
chain. Further, it is well understood that sewerage
coverage will not meet the complete sanitation
Globally, around 2.7 billion people are served by
needs in all areas, and a strategy which is a
onsite sanitation technologies and it is expected
combination of OSS and off-site (decentralised
that the number is going to get doubled by 2030.
and centralised) must co-exist in all cities and
On Site Sanitation (OSS) is not only used to fulfill
must be given equal attention. Over time the
the needs of rural population but also the needs
relative proportions of coverage by OSS and off-
of around one billion people in urban areas. In
site systems may change but both will need to
developing countries OSS, have much wider
be managed well. However, the current policies
coverage than sewer systems. For example,
are not explicit enough and also do not provide
in Sub-Saharan Africa, 65-100% of sanitation
an outcome-focused direction on this issue. As a
access in urban areas is provided through onsite
first step, MoUD and a host of research and civil
technologies. Though OSS is used widely the
society organisations jointly drafted and signed
management of FSSM is inadequate and needs
a National Declaration on Faecal sludge and
critical attention.
Septage management (FSSM) on 9th September,
2016. Pursuant to the Declaration, this FSSM

15
• With the fast urbanization the conventional
sewerage systems are not likely to keep pace
with the growing demand in the developing
countries
• Most of the Sewerage systems that have been
constructed in low-income countries have failed
because of high O & M costs.
• For more than a decade, there is a shift in
approach among the practitioners globally and
they have started to acknowledge and consider
decentralized technologies and FSSM services as
long-term and sustainable options.

NatioNal Policy oN Faecal Sludge aNd SePtage MaNageMeNt (FSSM)
16
3 OBJeCTIVeS AND SCOPe
3.1. ViSion iii. Define the roles and responsibilities of various
government entities and agencies, and of other
The vision for Faecal Sludge and Septage
key stakeholders such as the private sector, civil
Management in urban India is:
society organisations and citizens for effective
implementation of FSSM services throughout the
All Indian cities and towns become totally sanitized,
country.
healthy and liveable and ensure sustenance of
good sanitation practices with improved Onsite
iv. enable and support synergies among relevant
Sanitation Services together with faecal sludge and
Central Government programs such as SBM,
septage management to achieve optimum public
AMRUT and the Smart Cities Mission to realise
health status and maintain clean environment with
safe and sustainable sanitation for all at the
special focus on the poor.
earliest, possibly by the year 2019.
3.2. objectiVeS v. While not compromising the eventual compliance
to the strict environmental discharge standards
The key objective of the urban FSSM Policy is to
already set, recognising the constraints in
set the context, priorities, and direction for, and
achieving these standards, adopt an appropriate,
to facilitate, nationwide implementation of FSSM
affordable and incremental approach towards
services in all ULBs such that safe and sustainable
achieving these standards.
sanitation becomes a reality for all in each and
every household, street, town and city. More
vi. Mitigate gender-based sanitation insecurity
specifically, the Policy will:
directly related to FSSM, reducing the
experience of health burdens, structural
i. Move India on the path of mainstreaming FSSM
violence, and promote involvement of both
in urban India by the year 2019, and ensure that
genders in the planning for and design of
all benefits of wide access to safe sanitation
sanitation infrastructure.
accrue to all citizens across the sanitation
value chain with containment, extraction,
transportation, treatment, and disposal / re-use 3.3. SPecific MiLeStoneS
of all faecal sludge, septage and other liquid
waste and their by-products and end-products. 3.3.1. Leveraging fSSM to achieve 100%
access to safe sanitation
ii. Suggest and identify ways and means, including • Promoting access for households to safe
the methods and resources, towards creation faecal sludge and septage management facilities
of an enabling environment for realising safe (including proper disposal arrangements).
and sustainable FSSM in India.

17
• Promoting community-planned and managed • Extending access to proper faecal sludge
faecal sludge and septage management and septage management facilities for poor
wherever necessary, for groups of households. communities and other disadvantaged
settlements.
• Adequate availability and 100 % upkeep and
management of Public Sanitation facilities in all 3.3.3. Sanitary and Safe disposal
Urban Areas, to rid them of open defecation and • Promoting proper functioning of faecal sludge
environmental hazards and to safely manage their and septage management systems and ensuring
faecal sludge and septage. proper collection and disposal of the faecal
sludge.
3.3.2. achieving integrated citywide
Sanitation: Mainstreaming Sanitation • Promoting recycle and reuse of treated sewage
• Mainstream thinking, planning and implementing for non-potable applications wherever possible.
measures related to faecal sludge and septage
management in all sectors and departmental • Promoting proper design and construction
domains as a cross-cutting issue, especially in all of OSS facilities.
urban management endeavours.
3.3.4. awareness generation and behaviour
• Strengthening national, state, city and local change
institutions (public, private and community) to • Generating awareness about faecal sludge and
accord priority to sanitation provision, including septage management and its linkages with public
planning, implementation and O&M management. and environmental health amongst communities

NatioNal Policy oN Faecal Sludge aNd SePtage MaNageMeNt (FSSM)
18
and institutions including hazards from OSS liquid support sanitation services, urban development
overflow. and improved delivery of services in urban and
peri-urban areas of India. It also covers the
• Promoting mechanisms to bring about and initiatives undertaken and/or supported by all
sustain behavioural changes aimed at adoption Central Government Ministries, Departments,
of healthy sanitation designs and practices, Agencies, Authorities and Public Sector
including the responsibility to ensure safe Undertakings that have a bearing on sanitation
containment and management of faecal sludge services in urban and peri-urban areas. Further,
and septage by urban households including liquid the Policy applies to every urban local body,
effluent. outgrowths in urban agglomerations, census
towns as declared by the Registrar General and
Census Commissioner of India, notified areas,
3.4. ScoPe
notified industrial townships, areas under the
control of Indian Railways, airports, airbases, Ports
Only on-site sanitation facilities and areas served by
and harbours, defence establishments, special
such facilities would fall under the purview of this
economic zones, State and Central Government
FSSM Policy. It does not seek to cover network or
organisations, places of pilgrimage, religious
conventional sewerage system (including treatment
and historical importance as may be notified by
plants) of wastewater/sewage management.
respective State Government from time to time.
However it will address synergies between FSSM
and sewerage systems or municipal solid waste
The State Governments, ULBs, and relevant public
(MSW) management, e.g., co-treatment of faecal
and private utilities should take necessary steps
sludge and septage at sewage treatment plants
to ensure that this Policy covers all the projects,
or co-treatment and management of faecal sludge
programs and schemes related to provision
and septage, and MSW.
of onsite sanitation services in their respective
jurisdictions, irrespective of the source(s) of funding
Unless otherwise specified, the scope of this Policy
for these projects, programs and schemes.
extends to all the projects, programs and schemes
of the Central Government that facilitate and

19
4 LeGISLATIVe AND
ReGULATORy CONTexT
4.1. centraL LawS and ruLeS Building Code of India published by the Bureau
of Indian Standards (BIS) as applicable for Septic
The legal context for FSSM includes municipal tanks, soak pits, cess pools, leach pits, drainage
building byelaws, environment laws, laws for the fields etc. also need to be examined and taken into
legal prohibition of “manual scavenging” and account while framing the FSSM policy. The Model
institutional laws that provide for the establishment, Building Bye-Laws (MBBLs), 2016 framed by the
powers and functions of local authorities. The Town and Country Planning Organisation can also
first category, which includes the Municipal Law, be referred.
the environment (Protection) Act, 1986 and the
Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, The employment of Manual Scavengers and
1974 provide a framework for control of effluent, Construction of Dry Latrines (Prohibition) Act,
sewage and septage discharge. Further, the Solid 1993 put a ban on dry latrines, i.e., latrines with
Waste Management (SWM) Rules, 2016 under the no water-seal or flushing mechanism, and the
environment (Protection) Act apply to the final and employment of persons for manually carrying
safe disposal of post-processed residual faecal human excreta. This was supplemented in 2013
sludge and septage to prevent contamination with the Prohibition of employment as Manual
of ground water, surface water and ambient air. Scavengers and their Rehabilitation Act, 2013 by
Further, the SWM Rules 2016 will also apply which “hazardous cleaning” in relation to sewers
for disposal and treatment of faecal sludge and and septic tanks was also banned. The law now
septage, before or after processing, at landfills and provides that manual cleaning of sewers and septic
for use as compost. The provisions of the National tanks, if necessary, may be carried out only in
highly controlled situations, with adequate safety
precautions, and in accordance with specific rules
and protocols for the purpose.

NatioNal Policy oN Faecal Sludge aNd SePtage MaNageMeNt (FSSM)
20
5 ROLeS AND
ReSPONSIBILITIeS
The Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD), across urban areas of India, there are a number
Government of India (GoI) will be responsible for the of factors, constraints and opportunities that are
overall guidance, coordination and interpretation of peculiar to specific situation of States and cities
this Policy. It will disseminate the Policy among the with respect to sanitation, climate, physiographic
State and ULB governments as well as dovetail it factors, economic, social and political parameters,
with the Ministry’s urban development programmes and institutional variables. Therefore, each state
and schemes. It will provide the necessary and city needs to formulate its own FSSM strategy
technical and planning support to the States and and integrate the same in their respective State
ULBs and will also design, lead and implement a and city sanitation plans in overall conformity to
national awareness campaign on this issue. the National Policy (See Annexe 1 for State Level
FSSM Template). Several other stakeholders
GoI recognizes that sanitation is a State subject such as households, civil society organisations,
and on-ground implementation and sustenance of the private sector (small, medium and large),
public health and environmental outcomes requires research organisations, too have a critical role to
strong city level institutions and stakeholders. play in achievement of safe and sustainable FSSM
Although there are some common elements services for all.
tabLe 1: SuMMary of roLeS and reSPonSibiLitieS
Institution Lead Role Supportive Role
Ministry • Technical and planning support to States and ULBs Formulation of State and City level
of Urban • Training and capacity building of State level officials FSSM strategies and implementation
Development and those from select ULBs plans
• Funding through specific schemes and plans
• National level awareness and behaviour change
campaign
• Support Research and Capacity Building in the
sector
• Create enabling environment for participation
of the private sector, NGOs and CSOs in provision
of FSSM services including to the poor and
marginalized households and areas
• National level monitoring and evaluation
Ministry of • Enforce compliance of the relevant environmental Support and build capacity of State
Environment, laws and rules during the collection, transport, Pollution Control towards enforcement
Forest and treatment and disposal of faecal sludge and septage of relevant laws and rules
Climate Change

21
Institution Lead Role Supportive Role
Ministry of Social • Strive towards elimination of manual scavenging Help States and ULBs eliminate
Justice and and rehabilitation of manual scavengers manual scavenging and rehabilitate
Empowerment • Monitor and evaluate progress at the National Level manual scavengers
• National level awareness campaign
Ministry of Gender mainstreaming of IEC material
Women and Child for FSSM across the country
Development
State • Develop State level FSSM Strategy and • Technical, financial and
Governments Implementation Plan administrative support to ULBs
• Develop Operative Guidelines on FSSM • Encourage coordination and
• Training and capacity building of ULB officials cooperation among ULBs
and others engaged in provision of FSSM services • Regulate and help ULBs set
• State level awareness and behaviour change up systems to ensure financial
campaign sustainability in provision of FSSM
• Create enabling environment for participation services
of the private sector, NGOs and CSOs in provision • Implement Municipal Byelaws.
of FSSM services including to the poor and
marginalized households and areas
• Funding through specific schemes and plans
• Support Research and Capacity Building
in the sector
• State level monitoring and evaluation
Urban Local • Design, develop, plan and implement ULB level Create enabling environment for
Bodies FSSM strategy NGOs and private initiatives to achieve
• Set up and ensure operation of systems for 100% safe and sustainable FSSM
safe and sustainable collection, transport, treatment
and disposal of faecal sludge & septage
• Develop expertise, in-house and outsourced,
to provide safe and effective FSSM services
• Awareness and behaviour change campaign
to engage diverse stakeholders
• Develop training programmes for masons to build
requisite skills in construction of quality septic tanks
as per BIS / NBC norms
• Set up systems to ensure financial sustainability
in provision of FSSM services
• Achieve objectives of FSSM Policy in a time-bound
manner
• Design and implement plans to eliminate manual
scavenging and rehabilitate manual scavengers
• Funding through specific schemes and plans
• Monitor and evaluate FSSM strategy and
implementation plan
• Implement Municipal Byelaws
Households • Timely and regular cleaning of septic tanks through Engage with decision-makers at State
approved entities and ULB level to ensure that they
• Regular maintenance and monitoring of septic tanks receive good quality FSSM services
• Timely payment of user fee and/or charges, if any,
towards FSSM services
• Practice Building Byelaws for construction of OSS.

NatioNal Policy oN Faecal Sludge aNd SePtage MaNageMeNt (FSSM)
22
6 IMPLeMeNTATION
APPROACH
It is envisaged that State-specific FSSM Policy, already put in place such guidelines. They could be
Strategy and Guidelines conforming to the National modified, if required, in the context of this FSSM
Policy will be developed by each State. Policy. These existing State-level guidelines provide
good examples for other States to prepare their
own set of guidelines.
6.1. S tate-LeVeL iMPLeMentation
Strategy
FSSM services are provided by a mix of formal
public service providers, contractual operators and
In line with the National FSSM Policy each state
informal local service providers, but with very little
is expected to develop and issue an FSSM
supervision and control to ensure compliance with
Implementation Strategy and Plan Guideline.
environment, health, safety and laws prohibiting
In accordance with State Policy and Plan, the
manual scavenging. Rules, Byelaws, regulations
Guidelines should provide an overall state-
and operative guidelines for faecal sludge and
level framework, objectives, timelines and
septage management will address (but not limited
implementation plans to the ULBs. States such
to) the following:
as Maharashtra, Odisha and Tamil Nadu have
figure 2: iMPLeMentation ProceSS
national and State Level performance
State Level
Policy, Preparation Monitoring
implementation of fSSM
of city
Plan & fSSM
service
operational level fSSM
guidelines levels
for uLbs
capacity
national
building of implementation
fSSM
uLbs for of fSSM policy
Policy
fSSM
funding from national/State/uLb own funds

23
• Design of septic tanks, pits etc. (adapted to local • Penalty clauses for untreated discharge for
conditions), including siting, and methods of households as well as desludging agents and
approval of building plans, or retro-fitting existing unsafe emptying and handling of faecal waste.
installations to comply with rules and byelaws.
• Regular monitoring and evaluation of the entire
• Delineation of private (individual houses, process of FSSM
groups housing, institutions etc.) and public
responsibilities (urban local bodies and other • Training, accreditation, education and awareness
local authorities) in relation of faecal sludge and programs
septage management
All public and private sector staff should adhere
• Details of the planning and implementation to safety norms as provided in the Manual on
process for carrying out safe and sustainable Sewerage and Sewage Treatment published by
management of all faecal sludge and septage. the Ministry of Urban Development and such other
This may be integrated with overall city land safeguards under the Prohibition of employment
use planning, with the timelines for holistically as Manual Scavengers and their Rehabilitation Act,
addressing waste water management via on-site, 2013 and that the ULB may provide under its own
decentralised or centralised systems. rules. For disposal of septage, the ULB will need
to follow the standards set out in the environment
• Special provisions for medium and large format (Protection) Act, 1986, and SWM Rules 2016
real estate developments depending on the mode of disposal.
• Frequency of desludging, and O&M It is important that all ULBs make provision of land
of installations and the responsibilities and other infrastructure facilities required for safe
of householders (owner/occupant) treatment and disposal /reuse of human waste
generated in their areas. This should go hand
• Operating procedures for desludging including in hand with strict enforcement of disposal by
safety procedures with an emphasis on the desludgers, as well as recognition and partnership
safety, health and dignity of sanitation workers with such providers of service. Desludging should
(abiding by the Prohibition of employment as be carried out in an organised manner by taking
Manual Scavengers and their Rehabilitation Act, into account of each and every septic tank and its
2013) cleaning frequency through a registered agency.
Desludgers should be asked to register with the
• Licensing, record-keeping, monitoring and municipal bodies and there should be a strong
reporting arrangements for faecal sludge and partnership and dis-incentive to unsafe disposal.
septage service providers
An important part of work on FSSM involves
• Methods and locations of transport (conveyance), constant and deep engagement with communities,
treatment and safe disposal so that they understand and support activities
that ULBs will take up. It has been found that
• Tariffs or cess/tax etc. for septage management communities are reluctant to have faecal sludge
in the city

NatioNal Policy oN Faecal Sludge aNd SePtage MaNageMeNt (FSSM)
24
treatment facilities close to their vicinity, but are system users, NGOs, municipal employees,
not as sensitive to faecal sludge that is dumped relevant private sector firms, elected representative
untreated close to their homes! and the media.
Households should also be encouraged to have a each FSSM plan will have a specific monitoring
regular desludging schedule and this too, should and evaluation framework to continuously gauge
be monitored by the municipal / urban local bodies implementation progress and document lessons
through a systematic monitoring system. Some for constant improvement. It is very important
good examples are in setting up call centres, and that cities work systematically with each group
formalizing associations of desludgers and ensuring of stakeholders to ensure alignment of goals and
that households are regularly desludged. A system adoption. The ownership for all activity relating
of incentives (for example, discounts on taxes) and to FSSM must be driven by the Municipal /ULB
disincentives (penalties) should be set up. Chairperson and Chief executive concerned.
FSSM plans need to be backed by enabling
6.2. uLb LeVeL iMPLeMentation PLan
regulatory and institutional framework. enforcement
of all regulations should be strict, to ensure
each ULB is expected to develop a detailed FSSM
compliance and also provide the right dis-
plan in conformity to the National FSSM policy and
incentives. At the same time, timely rewards and
respective State guidelines on FSSM. Citywide
incentives should be given to both communities
assessment of FSSM is the key step for FSSM
and service providers to encourage positive
process planning. Such plan should be technically
behaviour.
appropriate and financially feasible. Assessment
in each area entails review of available information
at city level, identifying information gaps, and
conducting field studies where necessary.
In addition, adequate attention and focus has to
be paid to public outreach and behaviour change
communications to ensure timely and necessary
participation of all the key stakeholders. The range
of stakeholders may include on-site sanitation

25
7 TeCHNOLOGICAL
OPTIONS
A line diagram and brief write up on dedicated the ULBs level, the treated effluent coming out
Faecal Sludge Treatment Plant (FSTP) is part of of the treatment system should meet the CPCB
the brief technical note attached as Annexure prescribed discharge norms.
– III. Whatever the technical options used at
8 FINANCING PLAN
The Government of India may provide assistance promote engagement of private sector participation
for funding projects proposed as part of FSM Plans across sanitation service chain and should
through its ongoing urban development schemes encourage ULBs to start levying sanitation tax/ user
and programs. However, the emphasis will be charges to meet the O&M cost for effective FSSM
on improving the efficiency of existing sanitation operations at city level. They should also facilitate
infrastructure and service delivery. the involvement of private sector participation
through an easy and amenable PPP relationship
State Governments should prioritize funds to framework, to ensure adequate financing and
implement the FSSM plan at City level. They should sustainability of FSSM projects.

NatioNal Policy oN Faecal Sludge aNd SePtage MaNageMeNt (FSSM)
26
9 MONITORING & eVALUATION
At the national level, the Government of India State Government will be responsible for Monitoring
is adopting Sanitation Benchmark framework and evaluation of its Cities’ performance, and
of revised service level benchmarks for sanitation hence needs to devise data collection and
that assess performance of citywide sanitation, reporting systems using indicator framework
capturing on-site sanitation systems and sewage developed for Sanitation Benchmark. ULBs in turn
management. Sanitation Benchmark framework need to develop database, registry of certified
for revised Service Level Benchmarks for Sanitation on-site sanitation system, robust reporting format
is attached as Annexure 2. to track compliance of households (establishments,
etc.) with outcomes and process standards.
10 CAPACITy BUILDING
& TRAINING
Government of India will help formulate a strategy Government, academic institutions and private
on capacity building and training on FSSM to sector organizations. They also need to focus
support States and Cities to build their personnel on capacity building, i.e. not just training but also
capacities and organizational systems for delivery development of systems and capacities of ULBs
of sanitation services. Government of India will in sanitation, in line with the Urban Sector Reforms
make effort to integrate the FSSM components that the State may be implementing. ULBs will
in ongoing capacity building programme. need to provide training on sanitation to their own
staff – using the specialized agency selected by
The State Government needs to identify agencies State Government. They will need to utilize ongoing
that will train its State level and ULB personnel and Govt. of India and State Government Schemes for
orientation of elected representatives on aspects training and capacity building in order to achieve
related to FSSM. The States and ULBs need to set this. Training will also need to be imparted to
up and develop strategies for citizen engagement private sector players and NGOs to help them
through city sanitation task forces. These engage and deliver effectively in the provision
agencies could be specialist agencies of the State of FSSM services.

27
11 exPeCTeD OUTCOMeS
As this Policy is implemented across the country, it • Safe disposal of all collected faecal sludge and
is expected to yield significant benefits in terms of septage at designated sites (sewage treatment
improved public health indicators, reduced pollution plants, faecal sludge treatment facilities for safe
of water bodies and groundwater from human and scientific disposal, etc.)
waste, and resource recovery leading to reuse of
treated waste and other end products. Some key • Continuous improvements in efficiency and
projected outcomes are: effectiveness in the entire FSSM chain:
containment, collection, conveyance, treatment
• Containment of all human waste in 100% of the and disposal
towns and cities
• Preventing Contamination of water bodies and
• Safe collection and conveyance of human waste groundwater from human waste (faecal matter)
to treatment and disposal sites in all the towns and cities across India
• Cost-effective solution for management of human • Nuisance from faecal sludge reduced to minimum
waste through integrated network sewerage, levels, resulting in nuisance-free living space in
small bore sewerage, and faecal sludge and urban India
septage management.
• Maximum reuse of treated sludge as fertilizer
• Clarity among different stakeholders on identifying in farmlands, parks, gardens and other such
and implementing best and economically viable avenues, reuse of treated sewage, as source
sanitation solutions of energy where feasible, and any other
productive uses.
• Technical capability among ULBs to effectively
implement FSSM • Drastic reduction in incidences of diseases due
to safe & sustainable FSSM services.
• Scheduled emptying of septic tanks or other
containment systems at an interval of 2-3 years
as recommended by CPHeeO Sewerage
& Sewage Treatment Manual and the MoUD
Advisory on Septage Management (2013)

NatioNal Policy oN Faecal Sludge aNd SePtage MaNageMeNt (FSSM)
28
annexure – 1:
FRAMeWORk FOR
PRePARATION OF STATe
LeVeL FSSM PLAN
i. Cover page containing title of the document; 2. objectiVeS of the fSSM PoLicy
name, address and logo of the issuer of the
2.1. Vision [high level purpose of sanitation and
Policy (Urban Development Department,
FSSM such as clean cities, healthy living, high
Municipal Administration Department, etc.)
standards of living, become a preferred state
for tourism / business destination, etc.]
ii. Letter – Minister/Secretary, Department of
Urban Development, Government of [State
2.2. Objectives and Scope [why is the State issuing
name] (Optional)
the FSSM Policy, to meet what challenges and
what is covered by this Policy (geographically,
1. introduction
institutionally, issues)]
1.1. Current sanitation status in the State
[information on toilet coverage, percentages 2.3. expected outcomes [what benefits for whom
of sewered and on-site sanitation (OSS), State hopes to achieve from effective FSSM]
challenges faced]
3. LegiSLatiVe and reguLatory
1.2. Definition of faecal sludge and septage; what
context
is faecal sludge and septage management
(FSSM)
3.1. Central Laws, Rules and Regulations
[environment (Protection) Act, 1986 and the
1.3. Sources of faecal sludge and septage
Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution)
[generated, collected, transported, treated
Act, 1974 provide a framework for control of
at present, what is not treated and disposed
effluent, wastewater and septage discharge.
of scientifically, ensuing environmental pollution
The Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) Rules,
and public nuisance]
2016 under the environment (Protection)
Act apply to the final and safe disposal of
1.4. Importance of FSSM [alignment with overall
post-processed residual faecal sludge and
sanitation vision of the State; arising health,
septage to prevent contamination of ground
social, economic and environmental benefits]
water, surface water and ambient air. Further,

29
the MSW Rules 2016 will apply to the final by the Ministry of Urban Development and
and safe disposal of post-processed residual such other safeguards under the Prohibition of
faecal sludge and septage. The employment employment as Manual Scavengers and their
of Manual Scavengers and Construction Rehabilitation Act, 2013.]
of Dry Latrines (Prohibition) Act, 1993 put
a ban on dry latrines, i.e., latrines with no 3.2. State Laws, Rules and Regulations [list them
water-seal or flushing mechanism, and the out along with their relevance to FSSM]
employment of persons for manually carrying
human excreta. This was supplemented in
4. roLeS and reSPonSibiLitieS [Roles
2013 with the Prohibition of employment as
and responsibilities of the State Government,
Manual Scavengers and their Rehabilitation
ULB, Private sector, Research organisations,
Act, 2013 by which “hazardous cleaning”
NGOs, external funding agencies, households,
in relation to sewers and septic tanks was
service providers such as masons and
also banned. The law now provides that
architects; among others, areas covered
manual cleaning of sewers and septic tanks,
should include development of State and
if necessary, may be carried out only in very
ULB level Implementation Strategy and
controlled situations, with adequate safety
Guidelines on FSSM, formation of rules and
precautions, and in accordance with specific
regulation on FSSM, awareness generation
rules and protocols for the purpose. All public
and behavior change, training and capacity
and private sector staff should adhere to
building, funding sources and mechanisms,
safety norms as provided in the Manual on
enabling environment for the participation of
Sewerage and Sewage Treatment published
the private sector in providing FSSM services,

NatioNal Policy oN Faecal Sludge aNd SePtage MaNageMeNt (FSSM)
30
monitoring and evaluation, and implementation 7. Monitoring and eVaLuation [outline
of the FSSM strategy and action plan. Clear plans for development of a robust M&e
delineation of responsibilities for each area at framework to measure and monitor expected
each level (State / City).] outcomes at State and ULB level; such a
framework will form part of the State FSSM
5. iMPLeMentation aPProach [outline Implementation Strategy and Guidelines]
of how the State Government plans to
operationalize the FSSM Policy] 8. coMMunity engageMent and
StakehoLder inVoLVeMent [Outline
5.1. State FSSM Implementation Strategy and plans for developing a robust community
Guidelines [brief on how the State Government engagement platform for continuous
plans to develop the Implementation Strategy involvement of ULB citizens and support to
and Guidelines and then operationalize them] FSSM activities being initiated by the state.
Also, alert citizens to the dangers of untreated
5.2. ULB-level Implementation Plan [what FSS in their environment and the need for all
should be the key constituents of such an to pay for its safe treatment and disposal.
Implementation Plan by each ULB; details of
such a ULB level framework could be seen at: 9. caPacity buiLding and training
www.ifsmtoolkit.pas.org.in] [outline the approach, potential or identified
institutional partners, possible sources of
funding, key audiences for capacity building
6. financing fSSM
and training, what skills need to be built upon
for successful implementation of FSSM]
6.1. Funding options for State and ULBs [Central
Government Schemes, 14th Finance
10. annexureS (oPtionaL) [add any specific
Commission funds, State Government
Central and/or State Government Guidelines,
schemes]
model implementation plans for ULBs, M&e
framework, other relevant documents]
6.2. Other funding models [private sector
participation and funding, levying of fees
and user charges, CSR funds, funding from
external agencies]

31
annexure – 2:
DRAFT SAN-BeNCHMARk
FRAMeWORk
for reViSed SerVice LeVeL benchMarkS for Sanitation
Current SLB indicators Proposed Sanitation Benchmark
(Sewerage System) (Sewerage + Onsite systems)
1. coverage of sewerage network services 1. coverage of adequate sanitation system
Total number of properties with individual Percentage of households with individual or group toilets
connections to sewerage network as a percentage connected with adequate sanitation systems (sewer network/
of total number of properties in the city. septic tank / double pit system) to total households in the city.
2. collection efficiency of sewerage network 2. collection efficiency of sanitation system
Quantum of sewage collected at the intake of Weighted average of collection efficiency of each sanitation
the treatment plant to the quantity of sewage system, weighted by share of households dependent on each
generated (as per CPHEEO, 80% of water sanitation system.
consumed is generated as sewage).
3. adequacy of sewage treatment capacity 3. adequacy of treatment capacity of Sanitation System
Adequacy is expressed as secondary treatment Weighted average of adequacy of treatment plant capacity
capacity available as a percentage of normative available for each sanitation system, weighted by share of
wastewater generation. households dependent on each sanitation system.
4. Quality of sewage treatment 4. Quality of treatment of sanitation system
Quality of treatment is measured as a percentage Weighted average of quality of treatment of each sanitation
of WW samples that pass the specified secondary system, weighted by share of households dependent on each
treatment standards, that is, treated water samples sanitation system.
from the outlet of STPs are equal to or better than
the standards lay down by the GoI agencies for
secondary treatment of sewage.
5. extent of reuse and recycling of sewage 5. extent of reuse and recycling in sanitation system
Quantity of sewage that is recycled or reused after Weighted average of extent of reuse of treated wastewater
secondary treatment as a percentage of quantity and sludge after adequate treatment as a percentage of
of sewage received at the treatment plant. sewage and sludge received at the treatment plant, weighted
by share of household dependent on each sanitation system.
Source: SAN Benchmarks: Citywide assessment of sanitation service delivery – including onsite sanitation, PAS Project,
CEPT University; short URL - goo.gl/Uv7vLW available on website: www.pas.org.in

NatioNal Policy oN Faecal Sludge aNd SePtage MaNageMeNt (FSSM)
32
annexure – 3:
TeCHNOLOGICAL OPTIONS
The write-up below provides a brief outline about
various technological options practiced in the urban
setting.
Septic tank: A septic tank is a combined
sedimentation and digestion tank where the
sewage is held for one to two days. During this
period, the suspended solids settle down to
the bottom. This is accomplished by anaerobic
digestion of settled solids (sludge) and liquid,
resulting in reasonable reduction in the volume
of sludge, reduction in biodegradable organic
matter and release of gases like carbon dioxide, pore spaces. Chemical and biological processes
methane and hydrogen sulphide. The effluent treat the effluent before it reaches groundwater,
although clarified to a large extent, will still contain or a restrictive layer, such as hardpan, bedrock,
appreciable amount of dissolved and suspended or clay soils. These processes work best where
putrescible organic solids and pathogens. the soil is somewhat dry and permeable, and
contains sufficient oxygen for several feet below
the drain field.
1. SePtic tank with drain fieLd
In this modification of septic tank, treatment of 2. SePtic tank with Soak Pit
sewage effluent occurs in the soil beneath the
drain-field, which consists of long underground Soak pits are cheaper to construct and are
perforated pipes or tiles connected to the septic extensively used. They need no media when lined
tank. The network of pipes is laid filled in gravel- or filled with rubble or brick bats. The pits may
trench or beds in the soil. A drain-field trench is be of any regular shape, circular or square being
generally 18 to 36 inches wide and up to 100 feet more common. When water table is sufficiently
long. Liquid waste flows out of the tank into the below ground level, soak pits should be preferred
drain-field through the piping system and the soil only when land is limited or when a porous layer
below provides the final treatment and disposal of underlies an impervious layer at the top, which
the effluent. After the effluent has passed into the permits easier vertical downward flow than
soil, most of it percolates downward and outward. horizontal spread out as in the case of dispersion
The soil filters the effluent as it passes through the trenches.

33
Minimum horizontal dimension of soak pit should
be 1 m, the depth below the invert level or inlet
pipe being at 1 m. The pit should be covered and
the top raised above the adjacent ground
to prevent damage by flooding.
3. SePtic tank with SMaLL bore
SySteM:
An in-house toilet discharging to a septic tank (or 5. twin Pit Pour fLuSh Latrine
on-site digester) with liquids disposal via a small
diameter sewer to a central collection sump or Pour-flush leaching pit latrines were first developed
existing sewer system. in India in mid-forties with a single leach pit and
squatting pan placed over it. When the pit in use
gets filed up another pit is dug and the squatting
4. SePtic tank with baffLeS:
slab is removed and placed over the new pit.
The fist pit is covered with earth and the excreta
An anaerobic baffled reactor (ABR) is an improved
is allowed to digest. After one or two years, the
septic tank, which, after a primary settling chamber,
digested excreta is used as manure. To overcome
uses a series of baffles to force sewage to flow
this shortcoming, the Twin Pit Water Seal Toilet
under and over them as it passes from the inlet
design was introduced and in this case when one
to the outlet. The sewage is introduced into the
pit is full, the excreta is diverted to the second pit.
chamber at the bottom, leading to an enhanced
Both pits are connected with a junction chamber
contact with the active biomass which results
at one end. Pit walls have a honeycomb structure.
in an increased retention and anaerobic
The bottom of the pit is not plastered and is
degradation of suspended and dissolved organic
earthen. Depending on the number of users of
pollutants. ABRs are robust and can treat a wide
toilet, size of the pit varies. The filled up pit can be
range of sewage, but both remaining sludge and
conveniently emptied after 1.5 to 2 years, when
effluents still need further treatment in order to be
most of the pathogens die off. The sludge can
reused or discharged properly.
safely be used as manure. Thus the two pits can
be used alternately and perpetually.
This is a suitable on-site sanitation measure for
houses where the water table is sufficiently deep
to avoid ground water pollution.
Leach pits serve a dual function of (a) storage and
digestion of excreted solids and b) infiltration of the
waste liquids and are therefore, to be designed on

NatioNal Policy oN Faecal Sludge aNd SePtage MaNageMeNt (FSSM)
34
the basis of the following parameters:
• Sludge accumulation rate
• Long term infiltration rate of the liquid fraction
across the pit soil interface
• Hydraulic loading on the pit
• Minimum period required for effective pathogen
destruction
• Optimal pit emptying frequency. tanks / pit latrines can be treated by using “Faecal
• FSTP to FSM - a Case Study Sludge Treatment Plant”. FSTP is designed to
be aesthetically pleasing with no odor so that it
could be located close to the town, hence keeping
6. faecaL SLudge treatMent PLant
distances low for desludging operators to dispose.
(fStP)
The plant runs on gravity (No electricity) with
very little mechanical equipment that does not
Where there is no sewerage / underground
require skilled operators thus keeping operational
drainage (UGD) system, most of the households
expenditure low. These features enable the FSTP
depend on septic tanks for sewerage disposal.
to be financially sustained through their own funds.
The collected faecal sludge from these septic
referenceS:
• 2016, “Primer on Faecal sludge and septage management”, Ministry of Urban Development, Government of India
• 2015, “Guidelines for septage management in Maharashtra”, Swachh Maharashtra Mission, Urban Development
Department, Government of Maharashtra
• 2013, “Advisory Note on Septage Management in Urban India”. Government of India
• 2013, “Manual on Sewerage and Sewage Treatment Systems”, Central Public Health and Environmental Engineering
Organization (CPHeeO), MoUD.
• 2015, “Inventorization of Sewage treatment plants”, Central Pollution Control Board, Government of India.
• Performance Assessment System (PAS) Project, CEPT University, Ahmedabad. www.pas.org.in
• Faecal sludge Management assessment and planning toolkit - www.ifsmtoolkit.pas.org.in
• SAN Benchmarks: Citywide assessment of sanitation service delivery – including onsite sanitation, PAS Project, CEPT
University; short URL - goo.gl/Uv7vLW available on website: www.pas.org.in
• Faecal Sludge Management – Systems Approach for Implementation and Operation by Linda Strande, Mariska Ronteltap
and Damir Brdjanovic published by IWA Publishing, London, Uk.
• USEPA Publications (Decentralized Wastewater Treatment Systems: A Program Strategy; and A Homeowner’s Guide to
Septic Systems
• Model Municipal Building Byelaws 2016 – Town & Country Planning Organsiation (TCPO), MoUD
• National Builind code of India (latest amended) published by Bureau pf Indian Standards.
• Septic Tank and Drain-field Operation and Maintenance by Michael P. Vogel, Ed.D., MSU Extension Service Housing
Specialist
• Sustainable Sanitation and Water Management Portal
• IS: 2470 (Part I and II). Indian Standard Code of Practice for Installation of Septic Tanks and Disposal of Septic Tank
effluent, (Latest edition)

35

Government of India
Ministry of Urban Development