(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:4)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:2)(cid:7)(cid:8) (cid:9)(cid:10)(cid:11)(cid:2)(cid:6)(cid:8) (cid:12)(cid:10)(cid:2)(cid:6)(cid:13)(cid:14)(cid:5)(cid:10)(cid:3)(cid:8) (cid:15)(cid:5)(cid:7)(cid:4)(cid:16)(cid:17)
BACKGROUND
1. India is poised for rapid economic growth. Such future growth will largely come from
the secondary and tertiary sectors of the economy, i.e., the industrial and service sectors.
Since economic activities in these sectors primarily take place in urban areas, the state of
our towns and cities is crucial to India’s future growth.
2. Further, India’s urban population is currently around 30% of its total population.
Experience across the world has been that as economies grow, rapid urbanization takes
this proportion to over 60% before it begins to stabilize. As such, it is projected that India’s
urban population would grow to about 473 million in 2021 and 820 million by 2051, as
against only 285 million in 2001. Hence, cities must not only meet the mobility needs of
the current population but also provide for the needs of those yet to join the urban population.
In this context, the Government of India has launched the National Urban Renewal Mission
(NURM) that inter-alia seeks to bring about comprehensive improvements in urban
infrastructure, committing substantial funds for this purpose and requiring a series of reforms
that would make the investments sustainable.
3. For urban areas to be able to support the required level of economic activity, they
must provide for the easy and sustainable flow of goods and people. Unfortunately, however,
such flow of goods and people has been facing several problems. Most prominent among
them have been the following:
• Accessing jobs, education, recreation and similar activities is becoming
increasingly time
consuming. Billions of man
hours are lost with people
“stuck in traffic”. The
primary reason for this has
been the explosive growth
in the number of motor
vehicles, coupled with
limitations on the amount of
road space that can be
provided. For example, on
an average, while the
population of India’s six
1

major metropolises increased by about 1.9 times during 1981 to 2001, the number
of motor vehicles went up by over 7.75 times during the same period.
• The cost of travel, especially for the poor, has increased considerably. This is
largely because the use of cheaper non-motorised modes like cycling and walking
has become extremely risky, since these modes have to share the same right of
way with motorized
modes. Further, with
population growth, cities
have tended to sprawl and
increased travel distances
have made non-motorized
modes impossible to use.
This has made access to
livelihoods, particularly for
the poor, far more difficult.
• Travel in the city has
become more risky with accident rates having gone up from 1.6 lakh in 1981 to
over 3.9 lakh in 2001. The number of persons killed in road accidents has also
gone up from 28,400 to over 80,000 during the same period. This again has
tended to impact the poor more severely as many of those killed or injured tend
to be cyclists, pedestrians or pavement dwellers.
• Increased use of personal vehicles has led to increased air pollution.
4. Unless the above problems are remedied, poor mobility can become a major
dampener to economic growth and cause the quality of life to deteriorate. A policy is,
therefore, needed on the approach to dealing with this rapidly growing problem as also
offer a clear direction and a framework for future action.
VISION
• To recognize that people occupy center-stage in our cities and all plans would be
for their common benefit and well being
• To make our cities the most livable in the world and enable them to become the
“engines of economic growth” that power India’s development in the 21st century
• To allow our cities to evolve into an urban form that is best suited for the unique
geography of their locations and is best placed to support the main social and
economic activities that take place in the city.
2

OBJECTIVES
5. The objective of this policy is to ensure safe, affordable, quick, comfortable, reliable
and sustainable access for the growing number of city residents to jobs, education, recreation
and such other needs within our cities. This is sought to be achieved by:
• Incorporating urban transportation as an important parameter at the urban
planning stage rather than being a consequential requirement
• Encouraging integrated land use and transport planning in all cities so that travel
distances are minimized and access to livelihoods, education, and other social
needs, especially for the marginal segments of the urban population is improved
• Improving access of business to markets and the various factors of production
• Bringing about a more equitable allocation of road space with people, rather
than vehicles, as its main focus
• Encourage greater use of
public transport and non-
motorized modes by offering
Central financial assistance
for this purpose
• Enabling the establishment of
quality focused multi-modal
public transport systems that
are well integrated, providing
seamless travel across
modes
• Establishing effective regulatory and enforcement mechanisms that allow a level
playing field for all operators of transport services and enhanced safety for the
transport system users
• Establishing institutional mechanisms for enhanced coordination in the planning
and management of transport systems
• Introducing Intelligent Transport Systems for traffic management
• Addressing concerns of road safety and trauma response
• Reducing pollution levels through changes in traveling practices, better
enforcement, stricter norms, technological improvements, etc.
3

• Building capacity (institutional and manpower) to plan for sustainable urban transport
and establishing knowledge management system that would service the needs of
all urban transport professionals, such as planners, researchers, teachers, students,
etc
• Promoting the use of cleaner technologies
• Raising finances, through innovative mechanisms that tap land as a resource, for
investments in urban transport infrastructure
• Associating the private sector in activities where their strengths can be beneficially
tapped
• Taking up pilot projects that demonstrate the potential of possible best practices
in sustainable urban transport
NEED FOR A NATIONAL POLICY
6. Although the responsibility for
management of urban areas (and
thus urban transport) rests with the
State governments, a Central policy
is considered necessary as:
• Several key agencies that
would play an important
role in urban transport
planning work under the
Central government, with
no accountability to the
State government
• Several Acts and Rules, which have important implications in dealing with urban
transport issues, are administered by the Central Government
• A need exists to guide State level action plans within an overall framework.
• The launching of the NURM has provided a timely platform for providing significant
financial support from the Central Government for investments in urban transport
infrastructure. As such, this offers an opportunity for a meaningful national policy
that would guide Central financial assistance towards improving urban mobility.
4

• A need exists to build capacity for urban transport planning as also develop it as a
professional practice.
• A need exists to take up coordinated capacity building, research and information
dissemination to raise the overall level of awareness and skills.
REALIZING THE POLICY OBJECTIVES
7. The objectives of this policy would be achieved through a multi-pronged approach that
would revolve around the measures highlighted in the previous section. These are further
elaborated in the sections that follow.
Integrating land use and transport planning
8. Cities in India vary considerably in terms of their population, area, urban form, topography,
economic activities, income levels, growth constraints, etc. Accordingly, the design of the
transport system will have to depend on these city specific features. Further, transport planning
is intrinsically linked to land use planning and both need to be developed together in a
manner that serves the entire population and yet minimizes travel needs. In short, an integrated
master plan needs to internalize the features of sustainable transport systems. In developing
such plans, attention should also be paid to channel the future growth of a city around a pre-
planned transport network rather than develop a transport system after uncontrolled sprawl
has taken place. Transport plans should, therefore, enable a city to take an urban form that
best suits the geographical constraints of its location and also one that best supports the
key social and economic activities of its residents. Unfortunately, however, transport planning
has not received the extent of attention it should have in drawing up strategic development
and land use plans.
9. The Government of India would,
therefore, promote the development of
such integrated land use and transport
plans for all cities. To enable this, all
urban development and planning
bodies in the States would be required
to have in house transport planners
as well as representation from
transport authorities in their
managements. The Government of
India would extend support for the
preparation of such integrated land
use and transport plans, to the extent of 50% of the cost involved in developing such plans,
provided the city also demonstrates its willingness to act in accordance with them. In order
5

to create models for possible learning and replication, the Government of India would fully
support pilot studies in a few sample cities, of different characteristics and in different regions
of the country. As part of this exercise, each city would also be encouraged to identify
potential corridors for future development and then establish a transport system that would
encourage growth around itself. For example, radial corridors emerging from the city and
extending up to 20-30 kms could be reserved for future development. Such corridors would
have to be protected from encroachment by putting up physical barriers along such reserved
corridors and physically constructing roads on short stretches even before settlements come
up. This would imply that stretches of the corridor would come up first in order to guide the
location of the settlements and not allow undue sprawl to take place.
10. A scheme already exists under which the Central Government provides partial financial
support for traffic and transport studies in cities. This would be modified to enhance the
extent of Central Government support and also make these studies more broad based to
integrate transport planning with land use planning, keeping projected populations in mind.
Equitable allocation of road space
11. At present, road space gets
allocated to whichever vehicle occupies
it first. The focus is, therefore, the
vehicle and not people. The result is that
a bus carrying 40 people is allocated only
two and a half times the road space that
is allocated to a car carrying only one or
two persons. In this process, the lower
income groups have, effectively, ended
up paying, in terms of higher travel time
and higher travel costs, for the
disproportionate space allocated to
personal vehicles. Users of non-
motorized modes have tended to be
Is this the congestion problem everywhere??!!
squeezed out of the roads on account of
serious threats to their safety. If the focus of the principles of road space allocation were to be
the people, then much more space would need to be allocated to public transport systems
than is allocated at present.
12. The Central Government would, therefore, encourage measures that allocate road space
on a more equitable basis, with people as its focus. This can be achieved by reserving lanes
and corridors exclusively for public transport and non-motorized modes of travel. Similarly
lanes could be reserved for vehicles that carry more than three persons (popularly known as
High Occupancy Vehicle Lanes). Past experience has been that such reserved lanes are not
6

respected by motorists and therefore lose meaning. In order to facilitate better enforcement
of such lane discipline, suitable provisions would be introduced in the Motor Vehicles Act and
other instrumentalities to enable stringent penalties for violation.
Priority to the use of public transport
13. It is well known that public
transport occupies less road space
and causes less pollution per
passenger-km than personal
vehicles. As such, public transport
is a more sustainable form of
transport. Therefore, the central
government would promote
investments in public transport as
well as measures that make its use
more attractive than in the past.
Towards this end, the Central
government would encourage all
State capitals as well as other cities
with a population of more than one
million to start planning for high
capacity public transport systems. In doing so, they should look at various proven
technologies around the world, including the use of available waterways, They should
adopt a technology that would best suit the city requirements in the next 30 years.
Comprehensive city wide plans should be drawn up comprising trunk and feeder corridors
as well as good integration with personal modes, suburban traffic, etc. High cost trunk
route systems should, through appropriate hub-spoke arrangements be integrated with
feeder systems that enable higher ridership on such trunk systems.
14. In order to effectively promote such investments, the Central Government would:
• Provide 50% of the cost of preparing comprehensive city transport plans and
detailed project reports
• Offer equity participation and/or viability gap funding to the extent of 20% of the
capital cost of public transport systems
• Offer 50% of the cost of project development whenever such projects are sought
to be taken up through public-private partnerships, so that a sound basis for
attracting private partners can be established. The remaining cost of such project
development would have to come from the city development authority/State
government and a project developer.
15. Some allied issues that need to be addressed in this context are:
7

Quality and pricing of Public Transport
16. So far, fares for public transport have been set on the premise that this mode of travel
is used by the poor, who have no other means of meeting their travel needs. As such, fares
have been kept low as a measure of social equity. This has resulted in most public transport
systems being unable to recover their operating costs. It has, in fact, encouraged poorly
operated systems that have been financially sustainable only through serious compromises
on the quality of the service they render. In the present day context, however, public transport
serves another social purpose. It helps reduce congestion and air pollution, if users of personal
vehicles can be persuaded to shift to public transport. Their needs are, however, for improved
quality and not so much for low fares. It is, therefore, necessary to think of different types of
public transport services for different segments of commuters. Those who place a premium
on cost are the poorest sections of society and need to be given affordable prices. The cost
of providing public transport for them needs to be subsidized by other sections of society.
However, there is another segment that values time saved and comfort more than price. This
segment is comparatively better off and would shift to public transport if high quality systems
are available to them. The cost of providing public transport to them need not be subsidized
and can be met from the fare revenues. As such, the Central Government would encourage
the provision of different levels of services – a basic service, with subsidized fares and a
premium service, which is of high quality but charges higher fares and involves no subsidy.
17. To facilitate this, the Central Government would offer support under the NURM for
premium service infrastructure such as improved bus stations and terminals, improved
passenger information systems, use of intelligent transport systems for monitoring and
control, restructuring of State Transport Corporations, etc.
18. To ensure that the fares charged are fair and reasonable, the Central government
would require that a regulatory authority be set up by the State Government to, inter-alia,
regulate the prices to be charged by different types of public transport services.
Technologies for Public Transport
19. There is a wide spectrum of
public transport technologies. At one
end are high capacity, but high cost,
technologies like underground metro
systems and at the other are low
capacity bus systems running on a
shared right of way. Within these
extremes are a range of intermediate
possibilities, such as buses on
dedicated rights of way, elevated sky
bus and monorail systems, electric
8

trolley buses, etc. While some of
them are most effective over high
density trunk corridors others prove
useful as feeder systems or sub-
systems that serve limited sub-
areas within a city. Similarly, there
are examples of available waterways
being taken advantage of for public
transport as also systems like
ropeways that suit hilly terrains.
While the high capacity rail systems
and buses on shared rights of way
are the only ones tried out in India,
several of the others have proved
successful in other parts of the
world. Electric trolley buses have been running in San Francisco. New Bus Rapid Transit
Systems (BRTS) have become very popular in cities like Bogota (Colombia) and Curritiba
(Brazil).
20. Each of these technologies has its unique characteristics and is best suited to a
specific situation. Factors such as the urban form, terrain, availability of waterways, level of
demand, direction and extent of sprawl, projections for future growth, extent of population
density etc. are major determinants of the technology that should be chosen. The table at
Attachment – I highlights the advantages and disadvantages of some of the available public
transport technologies also indicating the technologies that best suit different local situations.
While rail based systems seem to suit dense cities with limited sprawl and only a few spinal
corridors, bus systems seem better where urban densities are lower and the city has spread
over a large area. Given the wide
range of possibilities, it is not
possible to prescribe a particular
technology in a generic policy and
such a choice will have to be made
as a part of city specific land use
and transport plans. It would also
depend on the kind of city that would
need to evolve at the particular
location. The Central Government
would, therefore, encourage all
proven technologies and not
promote any specific technology. In
order to facilitate the proper
evaluation of all the available
9

technologies around the world, it would create a knowledge center that would provide the
necessary information required for taking the right technological decisions for a specific city.
Wherever necessary, support would be provided for techno-economic studies to be conducted
by leading global consultants.
Integrated public transport systems
21. All cities have corridors that have varying densities of travel and hence need technologies
that best match the level of demand on the corridor. This often requires different operators
managing such systems. However, a good public transport system is one that is perceived
by the user as a single system and allows seamless travel between one made and the other
as also between systems managed by different operators. Such seamless interchange is
possible if proper inter-change infrastructure is available and users are able to use a single
ticket over all such systems. This also requires that a single agency takes responsibility for
coordination so that there is a common approach to public transport planning and
management.
22. Accordingly, the Central government would expect that investments in public transport
systems would also seek to ensure that such systems are well integrated and offer a
seamless system to the users. Central government’s financial support would be contingent
on appropriate authorities/entities being set up to ensure that a coordinated and integrated
public transport system becomes available.
Financing
23. The Central Government would encourage high capacity public transport systems being
set up through the mechanism of Special Purpose Vehicles (SPV) and would offer financial
support either in the form of equity or one time viability gap financing, subject to a ceiling of
20% of the capital cost of the project, after evaluating various parameters such as:
• Extent of resources mobilized by the State government through exploitation of its
land resources
• Extent of resources likely from private participation
• Institutional mechanisms set up by the State government to ensure a well
coordinated public transport system
• Willingness to divert funds from projects that add to road capacity towards public
transit systems
• Initiatives taken to promote non-motorized transport and improve safe access
to public transport.
10

• Willingness to introduce premium public transport systems that are priced high
but offer better quality with a view to limit the subsidy requirements in normal
services.
• Willingness to involve the private sector in operations under the overall supervision
and coordination of a public agency
• Willingness to price public transport systems in such a manner as to be financially
sustainable at the operating stage or depend only marginally on public budgets
24. The basic principle in financing such public transport systems would be that the
government should provide the infrastructure but the users (direct and indirect beneficiaries
within the city) must pay for the operating costs and the rolling stock.
25. The Central government’s capital support would take the form of equity participation or
one time viability gap funding and would be subject to a ceiling of 20% of the capital cost of
the project. Preference will be given to those who are able to demonstrate additional resources
for the project through dedicated taxes and innovative financing methods.
Role of para-transit
26. Para transit is normally expected to fulfill a need that neither public transport or personal
vehicles are able to fulfill. They normally cater to a category of occasional trips such as trips
to airports or rail stations with excessive baggage, or emergency trips that have to be
undertaken immediately and it is not possible to wait for public transport. Para transit would
not normally be used for regular commute trips to work or school. However, when the quality
of public transport deteriorates, para-transit tends to substitute for public transport.
Unfortunately, this has started happening in many Indian cities. As such, this policy would
seek to restore para-transit to its normal role by persuading the improvement of public transport.
Priority to non-motorized
transport
27. With increasing urban
sprawl and rising income levels,
non-motorized transport has lost
its earlier importance. Statistics
show that the share of bicycle trips
out of the total trips in Delhi has
declined from 17% in 1981 to 7%
in 1994. The longer trip lengths
have made cycling more difficult.
Further, non-motorized modes are
11

also exposed to greater
risk of accidents as
they share a common
right of way with
motorized vehicles.
However, non-motorized
modes are
environmentally friendly
and have to be given
their due share in the
transport system of a
city. The problems being
faced by them would
have to be mitigated.
28. First of all, the
safety concerns of cyclists and pedestrians have to be addressed by encouraging the
construction of segregated rights of way for bicycles and pedestrians. Apart from improving
safety, the segregation of vehicles moving at different speeds would help improve traffic flow,
increase the average speed of traffic and reduce emissions resulting from sub-optimal speeds.
Such segregated paths would be useful not only along arterials, to enable full trips using
NMT but also as a means of improving access to major public transport stations. Such
access paths, coupled with safe bicycle parking places, would contribute towards increasing
the use of public transport. Creative facilities like shade giving landscaping, provision of
drinking water and resting stations along bicycle corridors would also be encouraged as they
can mitigate, to a large extent, adverse weather conditions. The use of the central verge
along many roads, along with innovatively designed road crossings, seems to offer promise
for being developed as cycle tracks.
29. It has been the experience that many such cycle tracks and pedestrian paths do not
get used as initially envisaged. However, a view has been that this is because these facilities
are designed badly and without fully recognizing the limitations and problems faced by cyclists
or pedestrians. It would, therefore, be essential that such facilities be constructed after an
open debate on the designs with experts and the community that is expected to use them.
It is expected that such public appraisal would lead to designs that enable greater use by the
potential beneficiaries. Encroachment of footpaths too affects pedestrian safety adversely
and requires strict enforcement coupled with public participation. Pedestrian safety is also
adversely affected by the lack of safe crossing facilities at busy intersections of even high
traffic corridors.
12

30. The Central Government
would give priority to the
construction of cycle tracks and
pedestrian paths in all cities, under
the National Urban Renewal
Mission (NURM), to enhance
safety and thereby enhance use of
non-motorized modes. Cities would
also be encouraged to explore the
possibility of a public bicycle
program, where people can rent a
bicycle for use in specially
designated areas
. 31. The Central government
would support the construction of safe pedestrian crossings at busy intersections and high
traffic corridors.
32. The Central Government would support formulation and implementation of specific
“Area Plans” in congested urban areas that propose appropriate mix of various modes of
transport including exclusive zones for non-motorized transit.
33. The Central Government would also take up pilot projects, in a sample set of cities, to
demonstrate the improvements that are possible through the enhanced used of cycling, for
possible replication in other cities.
Parking
34. Land is valuable in all urban
areas. Parking places occupy
large portions of such land. This
fact should be recognized in
determining the principles for
allocation of parking space.
35. Levy of a high parking fee,
that truly represents the value of
the land occupied, should be used
as a means to make the use of
public transport more attractive.
Preference in the allocation of
parking space for public transport
....and this is the “Parking Problem”
vehicles and non-motorized modes
13

as well as easier access of work places to and from such spaces would go a long way in
encouraging the use of sustainable transport systems. Park and ride facilities for bicycle
users, with convenient inter-change, would be another useful measure. Simultaneously, a
graded scale of parking fee, that recovers the economic cost of the land used in such parking,
should be adopted. The objective would be to persuade people to use public transport to
reach city centers.
State governments would be required to amend building bye laws in all million plus cities so
that adequate parking space is available for all residents / users of such buildings. To enable
this, FAR norms would be made more liberal. Multi-level parking complexes should be made
a mandatory requirement in city centers that have
several high rise commercial complexes. Such
complexes could even be constructed underground,
including below areas declared as green belts in the
master plan. Such complexes could come up through
public-private partnerships in order to limit the impact
on the public budget. All such parking complexes would
be encouraged to go in for electronic metering so that
is there is better realization of parking fees to make
the investments viable and also a better recovery of
the cost of using valuable urban space in the parking
of personal motor vehicles. In residential areas too,
appropriate changes in bye-laws would be considered
to free the public carriage way from parked vehicles
that impede the smooth flow of traffic. Proposals for
parking complexes would also be given priority under
the National Urban Renewal Mission. Provisions would also be made in the appropriate
legislation to prevent the use of the right of way on road systems for parking purposes.
Freight traffic
36. As economic activities in cities expand and city population grows, a substantial amount
of freight traffic would be generated. The timely and smooth movement of such freight is
crucial to the well being of the people and the viability of the economic activities they undertake.
However, with limited capacity of the transport system, it is essential that freight traffic and
passenger traffic are so staggered as to make optimum use of the transport infrastructure. It
is a time honored and tested practice to use off-peak passenger travel times to move freight.
Many cities have earmarked late night hours for the movement of freight and restricted the
entry of heavy vehicles into cities during day time. Further, several cities have by-passes that
enable through traffic to go around the city and not add to city traffic. These practices are
sound and would be encouraged in all cities. For this purpose, cities would be encouraged to
build by-passes, through innovative and viable public – private partnerships. Similarly, facilities
14

for the parking of freight vehicles outside city limits, such as truck terminals, would also be
encouraged through public-private partnerships. Proposals for such facilities would be
considered under the National Urban Renewal Mission.
Legal and Administrative Issues
37. The current structure of governance for the transport sector is not equipped to deal with
the problems of urban transport. These structures were put in place well before the problems
of urban transport began to surface in India and hence do not provide for the right co-ordination
mechanisms to deal with urban transport. The Central Government will, therefore, recommend
the setting up of Unified Metropolitan Transport Authorities (UMTA’s) in all million plus cities,
to facilitate more co-ordinated planning and implementation of urban transport programs and
projects and an integrated management of urban transport systems. Such Metropolitan
Transport Authorities would need statutory backing in order to be meaningful.
38. The Central Government would also encourage the setting up of professional bodies
that have the capacity to make scientific assessment of the demand on various routes and
contract services that can be properly monitored. Towards this end, it would encourage
the setting up of umbrella bodies that regulate the overall performance of the public transport
system and ensure that the city has a comprehensive public transport system. Such bodies
would, inter-alia, design networks and routes, assess demand, contract services, monitor
performance, manage common facilities like bus stations and terminals, etc. They would
have representation from all the major operators and stakeholders.
39. Model legislation would be drafted for cities to consider and adopt, with such
modifications as may be required to suit city specific requirements.
Capacity building
40. The responsibility for the planning and implementation of urban transport systems
rests with the State governments and the municipal bodies. However, since the problems
associated with urban transport are of relatively recent origin in India, having surfaced
only from the early 1990s, the ability to fully understand and deal with these problems is
yet to fully mature. This calls for concerted efforts at strengthening capabilities at the State
and city level to address these issues and undertake the task of developing sustainable
urban transport systems.
41. Capacity building will have to be addressed at two levels – institutional and individual.
Institutional capacity would primarily involve creating a pool of knowledge and a knowledge
management center that would sustain and enhance expertise as well as facilitate more
informed planning. It would also sponsor regular research to help formulate the right mitigation
strategies, without merely adopting what other countries have tried. The Institute of Urban
15

Transport (India), an existing institute under the purview of the Ministry of Urban Development
would be suitably strengthened to discharge this responsibility. It would be built up to serve
as a national level facility to provide continuous advice and guidance on the principles of good
urban transport planning as emerges from its research. Advice on new technologies would
also be regularly available to implementing agencies from this institute. For this purpose, the
institute would become a store house of information on the various public transport technologies
being used in different parts of the world and would maintain the latest information and
literature on the experience with such technologies. It would, in fact be a comprehensive
repository of the best practices in the field.
42. The virtual lack of a database on urban transport statistics has severely constrained
the ability to formulate sound urban transport plans and reliably assess the impact of the
different initiatives that have been taken. The national level institute would build up a
database for use in planning, research, training, etc in the field of urban transport.
43. The Central Government would also encourage the development of such institutional
capacity at the State level through the platform of the National Urban Renewal Mission. A
specific scheme would need to be formulated for this purpose.
44. At the individual level, a major exercise of training and skill development of the public
officials and other public functionaries would be taken up to make such officials aware of the
nuances of urban transport planning and the specific issues involved in managing city transport.
This would be targeted at personnel belonging to the State transport departments, municipal
corporations, metropolitan development authorities, traffic police, environmental authorities,
State Transport Corporations, Public Works Departments, etc.
45. It is recognized that there are several proven technologies for public transport around
the world that have yet to be adopted in India. In order to build up the necessary capacity to
adopt such technologies within the country, the Central Government would facilitate joint
ventures and collaboration agreements
between such technology providers and
suitable Indian companies. Necessary
incentives would be provided to enable
such technologies to get
commercialized in India. This could be
by way of financing customized
prototypes, development of designs to
suit Indian conditions, trial operations,
training of the technical personnel, etc.
The objective would be to ultimately build
a level playing field for all proven
technologies.
16

46. As part of the exercise of skill development, academic programs in urban transport,
especially at the post-graduate level, would be strengthened so that a nucleus of qualified
urban transport professionals becomes available in the country. Suitable collaborations, with
leading institutes abroad, would be established to offer expertise to such programs in the
initial years. An annual urban transport conference would also be institutionalized, to bring
together the urban transport professionals in the country to share their experiences.
International experts would be invited to such a conference so that Indian professionals are
able to exchange information and learn from developments and experiences abroad. A well
rated urban transport journal would also be started.
Use of cleaner technologies
47. While petroleum based fuels are by far the most commonly used today, other alternatives
have been emerging, though slowly. CNG has been adopted in a big way for bus transport in
Delhi. Electric trolley
buses are also being
proposed in the city.
Electric vehicles have
already entered the market
for cars and auto
rickshaws. Electric two
wheelers are also under
development. Such
cleaner technologies need
to be encouraged so that
the problem of vehicular
pollution can be more
effectively dealt with.
Besides, renewable
sources need to be tapped
as a measure of
sustainable development
and in recognition of India’s energy security concerns. The Central Government would, therefore,
encourage the research, development and commercialization of cleaner technologies.
48. New technologies always find it difficult to enter an established market and new auto
fuel technologies would also face this problem. However, in view of their many advantages,
they would be offered suitable concessions and benefits that would enable them to make an
entry and compete with established technologies on more equitable terms. It is expected
that such competition will also encourage established technologies to improve their performance
characteristics and compete with the emerging choices.
17

49. Several vehicles on our roads tend to be poorly maintained and are overly polluting.
This is partly because the requirements of proper maintenance are not stringent and are
largely driven only by the owner’s motivation to save on fuel cost. Even where such motivation
exists, the lack of a widespread network of good quality repair facilities discourages them for
the exertion of having their vehicles
periodically tested.
50. In order to overcome these
problems, the Central Government
would, lay down a clear and time
bound schedule of progressively
tighter emission norms, with
adequate lead-time, to allow the
auto and oil industry to make the
required investments. Measures
would also be introduced to
incentivize the use of fuel efficient
(zero pollution) and small sized
vehicles that use up little road
space and also cause low pollution.
Statutory provisions would also be introduced requiring all in-use vehicles in a city, including
personal motor vehicles, to undergo a periodic check up and obtain a specified certification.
States would be encouraged to set up such certification facilities, in partnership with the
private sector. The Central Government would also support the establishment of training
centers for the staff of such certification establishments so that there are adequate skilled
personnel, both for certification and for undertaking the required repairs. All of these would
require that an effective regulatory body be set up to prescribe, monitor and enforce the
adherence of emission and safety standards.
Innovative financing mechanisms using land as a resource
51. It is evident that huge capital investments will be required in dealing with the urban
transport problems. Whether they are for constructing capital intensive mass transit systems
or segregated rights-of-way for cycles and pedestrians, a substantial financial burden would
devolve on the government. Most State governments and local bodies do not have the required
resources and, therefore, alternative methods of financing would have to be explored.
52. The Central Government would encourage the levy of dedicated taxes to be credited to
an urban transport fund and used exclusively to meet urban transport needs within the State.
Such dedicated taxes could be in the form of a supplement to the petrol and diesel taxes,
betterment levy on land owners or even an employment tax on employers. In fact, revenues
18

from a betterment levy along new high capacity public transport corridors would be included
as a component of the financing plan for such new public transport systems.
53. The Central Government would also encourage partnerships and greater use of private
capital in areas where the private sector can competitively deliver urban transport services.
More specifically, the greater use of private buses in city areas would be encouraged to
reduce the dependence on public budgets. The commercial utilization of land resources,
available with public transport service providers, is also recommended to raise additional
resources.
Association of the private sector
54. There are several activities in which the private sector can be beneficially engaged,
thereby saving financial resources for activities that only public agencies can best perform.
However, these have to be done under conditions that strike a fair balance between the
universal obligations of the government and the profit motive of the private operator. Accordingly,
the Central Government would encourage a more liberal use of the private sector, especially
in activities like the operation and maintenance of parking facilities, certification facilities,
repair facilities, construction and management of terminal facilities, etc. Till the mid 1980s
most public transport services were largely provided by publicly owned State Transport
Corporations. Since then, however, some States have permitted privately run services. While
public operations have tended to be high cost and most State Transport Corporations have
run up heavy losses, the reliability and safety record of inadequately regulated private operators
has been poor. On balance, the Central Government would encourage the State Governments
to involve the private sector in providing public transport services, but under well structured
procurement contracts.
NEED FOR PUBLIC AWARENESS AND COOPERATION
55. Urban transport policies can not succeed without the fullest co-operation of all the city
residents. Such cooperation can be best secured if the objective of any initiative is made
clearly known to them. It is, therefore, necessary to launch intensive awareness campaigns
that educate people on the ill effects of the growing transport problems in urban areas -
especially on their health and well being. The campaigns would seek their support for initiatives
like greater use of public transport and non-motorized vehicles, the proper maintenance of
their vehicles, safer driving practices, etc. Such campaigns would also encourage individuals,
families and communities to adopt “Green Travel Habits” that would make travel less polluting
and damaging. The Central Government would take up a major awareness campaign in this
regard and seek the support of the State Government in its implementation. Particular emphasis
would be laid on bringing about such awareness amongst children through inputs in their
school curricula.
19

PILOT PROJECTS
56. In order to demonstrate the potential benefits from the policy measures suggested
herein, the Central Government would take up pilot projects in a sample set of cities drawn
from different regions and different city types so that tested models of best practices can be
established for replication in other cities.
20

Annex 1
Relative characteristics of available public transport technologies
Technology Advantages Disadvantages Some cities Useful for
where operating
Very high carrying Very high capital costs Singapore, Very high density
Heavy rail
capacity High per unit operating Tokyo, corridors, where road
systems – costs if capacity utilization is Hongkong and space is very limited.
High speed low
several cities in Well suited for densely
underground,
Very low pollution in Inflexible Europe and populated cities that
elevated operations Long gestation period have low sprawl and
North America
Needs extensive feeder few spinal, long haul
or at grade
Needs very little network or very dense corridors
urban space captive area At grade systems are
Complex interconnectivity very good for sub-
with feeder system urban systems and
Relatively complex the fringe areas of a
technology requiring city where space is
highly specialized
more easily available
manpower for O&M
Light rail Capital costs are less Capital costs higher than for Several cities in Medium density
systems than for heavy rail bus systems North America corridors where
systems Inflexible
and Europe space availability is
Per unit operating Per unit operating costs adequate for
costs are less than for higher than for bus systems supporting elevated
if capacity utilization is low
heavy rail systems structures or at grade
Needs substantial urban tracks
Low pollution levels space if at grade
Medium density cities
Carrying capacity is lower
Needs less urban
than for heavy rail systems with limited sprawl
space than bus based though comparable to high
systems capacity bus systems
Needs extensive feeder
Needs limited urban
network or dense captive
space if elevated or
area
underground
Complex interconnectivity
(however capital costs
with feeder system
go up
Relatively complex
technology requiring
specialized skills for O&M
21

Technology Advantages Disadvantages Some cities Useful for
where operating
High Capital costs lower than Capacity not as high as Brazil, Colombia Medium density
capacity for rail based systems heavy rail systems though and several corridors where
bus Low O&M costs comparable to light rail other cities in space availability is
systems Higher capacity than systems Latin America adequate for
supporting the
on normal bus services More polluting than rail
dedicated right of
dedicated
More flexible than rail based systems way
lanes based systems
Needs imported fuel
Needs less extensive Medium density cities
feeder network than rail Needs urban space for with limited sprawl
based systems
dedicated corridor
Easy connectivity with
feeder system
Relatively simple
technology with easy
availability of manpower
for O&M
Sky bus System is non-polluting Not yet proven anywhere on Medium density
corridors where
Needs limited urban commercial operations
space is limited
space for supporting
Promising for dense
elevated structures Inflexible
city centers
Advantages / disadvantages of normal bus
Electric All routes suitable for
system but with a higher capital cost, though
Trolley bus buses but where
non-polluting. Relatively inflexible and impacts , San Francisco local pollution has to
city aesthetics due to overhead clutter. be low
Normal Very low capital cost Very low capacity Most cities around Low density corridors
buses on Low operating costs Polluting the world where local pollution
shared is not a critical issue
right of Highly flexible Low speeds
Feeder to higher
way Do not need feeder Poor social image
capacity systems
systems
22