NATIONAL SEEDS POLICY, 2002

INTRODUCTION

Indian Agriculture has made enormous strides in the past 50
years, raising foodgrains production from 50 million tonnes to over
200 million tonnes. In the process, the country has progressed from
a situation of food shortages and imports to one of surpluses and
exports. Having achieved food sufficiency, the aim now is to achieve

food and nutritional security at the household level.

The increase in agricultural production, however, has brought
in its wake, uneven development, across regions, crops, and also
across different sections of farming community. In the decade of
the 'nineties', a marked slackening in the pace of growth has
occurred, pointing to the need for infusing a new vitality in the

agricultural sector.

Seed is the most important determinant of agricultural
production potential, on which the efficacy of other agriculture
inputs is dependent. Seeds of appropriate characteristics are
required to meet the demand of diverse agro-climatic conditions and
intensive cropping systems. Sustained increase in agriculture
production and productivity is dependent, to a large extent, on
development of new and improved varieties of crops and an efficient

system for timely supply of quality seeds to farmers.

The seed sector has made impressive progress over the last

three decades. The area under certified seeds has increased from


less than 500 hectares in 1962-63 to over 5 lakh hectares in 1999-
2000. The quantum of quality seeds has crossed 100 lakh quintals.

The Seeds Act, 1966 and Seeds Control Order promulgated
thereunder, and the New Policy on Seeds Development, 1988, form
the basis of promotion and regulation of the Seed Industry. Far-
reaching changes, however, have taken place in the national
economic and agricultural scenario and in the’ international
environment since the enactment of the existing seed legislation and

the announcement of the 1988 Policy.
AIMS AND OBJECTIVES

It has become evident that in order to achieve the food
production targets of the future, a major effort will be required to
enhance the seed replacement rates of various crops. This would
require a major increase in the production of quality seeds, in which
the private sector is expected to play a major role. At the same time,
private and Public Sector Seed Organisations at both Central and
State levels, will be expected to adopt economic pricing policies
which would seek to realise the true cost of production. The
creation of a facilitative climate for growth of a competitive and
localised seed industry, encouragement of import of useful
germplasm, and boosting of exports are core elements of the

agricultural strategy of the new millennium.

Biotechnology will be a key factor in agricultural development
in the coming decades. Genetic engineering/modification
techniques hold enormous promise in developing crop varieties with

a higher level of tolerance to biotic and abiotic stresses. A


conducive atmosphere for application of frontier sciences in varietal
development and for enhanced investments in research and
development is a pressing requirement. At the same time, concerns
relating to

possible harm to human and animal health and bio-safety, as well as

interests of farmers, must be addressed.

Globalization and economic liberalization have opened up new
opportunities as well as challenges. The main objectives of the
National Seeds Policy, therefore, are the provision of an appropriate
climate for the seed industry to utilize available and prospective
opportunities, safeguarding of the interests of Indian farmers and
the conservation of agro-biodiversity. While unnecessary
regulation needs to be dismantled, it must be ensured that gullible
farmers are not exploited by unscrupulous elements. A regulatory
system of a new genre is, therefore, needed, which will encompass
quality assurance mechanisms coupled with facilitation of a vibrant

and responsible seed industry.


THRUST AREAS:-

1. VARIETAL DEVELOPMENT AND PLANT VARIETY
PROTECTION

1.1 The development of new and improved varieties of plants and

1.2

availability of such varieties to Indian farmers is of crucial
importance for a_ sustained increase in agricultural

productivity.

1.1.1 Appropriate policy framework and_ programmatic
interventions will be adopted to stimulate varietal development
in tune with market trends, scientific-technological advances,
suitability for biotic and abiotic stresses, locational

adaptability and farmers’ needs.

An effective sui generis system for intellectual property
protection will be implemented to stimulate investment in
research and development of new plant varieties and to

facilitate the growth of the Seed Industry in the country.

1.2.1 A Plant Varieties & Farmers’ Rights Protection (PVP)
Authority will be established which will undertake registration
of extant and new plant varieties through the Plant Varieties

Registry on the basis of varietal characteristics.

1.2.2 The registration of new plant varieties by the PVP

Authority will be based on the criteria of novelty,


1.3

1.4

1.5

1.6

distinctiveness, uniformity and stability.

1.2.3 The criteria of distinctiveness, uniformity and stability
could be relaxed for registration of extant varieties, which will
be done within a specified period to be decided by the PVP
Authority.

1.2.4 Registration of all plant genera or species as notified by

the Authority will be done in a phased manner.

1.2.5 The PVP Authority will develop characterisation and
documentation of plant varieties registered under the PVP Act

and cataloguing facilities for all varieties of plants.

The rights of farmers to save, use, exchange, share or sell farm
produce of all varieties will be protected, with the proviso that
farmers shall not be entitled to sell branded seed of a

protected variety under the brand name.

The rights of researchers to use the seed/planting material
of protected varieties for bonafide research and breeding of
new plant varieties will be ensured.

Equitable sharing of benefit arising out of the use of plant
genetic resources that may accrue to a breeder from
commercialisation of seeds/planting materials of a new variety,

will be provided.

Farmers/groups of farmers/village communities. will be

rewarded suitably for their significant contribution in evolution


1.7

1.8

1.9

1.10

of a plant variety subject to registration. The contribution of
traditional knowledge in agriculture needs to be highlighted

through suitable mechanisms and incentives.

A National Gene Fund will be established for implementation of
the benefit sharing arrangement, and payment. of
compensation to village communities for their contribution to
the development and conservation of plant genetic resources
and also to promote conservation and sustainable use of
genetic resources. Suitable systems will be worked out to
identify the contributions from traditional knowledge and

heritage.

Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture Crops will
be permitted to be accessed by Research Organisations and
Seed Companies from public collections as per the provisions
of the 'Material Transfer Agreement’ of the International Treaty

on Plant Genetic Resources and the Biological Diversity Bill.

Regular interaction amongst the Private and _ Public
Researchers, Seed Companies/Organisations and
Development Agencies will be fostered to develop and

promote growth of a healthy seed industry in the country.

To keep abreast of global developments in the field of Plant
Variety Protection and for technical collaboration, India may

consider joining Regional and International Organisations.


1.11 The PVP Authority may, if required, resort to compulsory
licensing of a protected variety in public interest on the ground
that requirements of the farming community for seeds and
propagating material of a variety are not being met or that the
production of the seeds or planting material of the protected

variety is not being facilitated to the fullest possible extent.


2.2

SEED PRODUCTION
To meet the Nation's food security needs, it is important to
make available to Indian farmers a wide range of seeds of
superior quality, in adequate quantity on a timely basis. Public
Sector Seed Institutions will be encouraged to enhance
production of seed towards meeting the objective of food and

nutritional security.

The Indian seed programme adheres to the limited three
generation system of seed multiplication, namely, breeder,
foundation and certified seed. Breeder seed is the progeny of

nucleus seed.

2.2.1 Nucleus seed is the seed produced by the breeder to
develop the particular variety and is directly used for

multiplication as breeder seed.

2.2.2 Breeder seed is the seed material directly controlled by
the originating or the sponsoring breeder or Institution for the

initial and recurring production of foundation seed.

2.2.3 Foundation seed is the progeny of breeder seed.
Foundation seed may also be produced from foundation seed.
Production of foundation seed stage-l and stage-Il may thus be
permitted, if supervised and approved by the Certification
Agency and if the production process is so handled as to

maintain specific genetic purity and identity.


2.3

2.4

2.5

2.6

2.7

2.2.4 Certified seed is the progeny of foundation seed or the
progeny of certified seed. If the certified seed is the progeny
of certified seed, then this reproduction will not exceed three
generations beyond foundation stage-l and it will be
ascertained by the Certification Agency that genetic identity

and genetic purity has not been significantly altered.

Public Sector Seed Production Agencies will continue to have
free access to breeder seed under the National Agriculture
Research System. The State Farms Corporation of India and
National Seeds Corporation will be restructured to make
productive use of these organisations in the planned growth of
the Seed Sector.

Private Seed Production Agencies will also have access to
breeder seed subject to terms and conditions to be decided by

Government of India.

State Agriculture Universities/ICAR Institutes will have the
primary responsibility for production of breeder seed as per

the requirements of the respective States.

Special attention will be given to the need to upgrade the
quality of farmers’ saved seeds through interventions such as

the Seed Village Scheme.

Seed replacement rates will be raised progressively with the

objective of expanding the use of quality seeds.


2.8

2.9

2.10

2.11

2.12

10

DAC, in consultation with ICAR and States, will prepare a
National Seed Map to identify potential, alternative and non-

traditional areas for seed production of specific crops.

To put in place an effective seed production programme, each
State will undertake advance planning and prepare a
perspective plan for seed production and distribution over a
rolling (five to six year) period. Seed Banks will be set up in
non-traditional areas to meet demands for seeds during

natural calamities.

The "Seed Village Scheme’ will be promoted to facilitate
production and timely availability of seed of desired
crops/varieties at the local level. Special emphasis will be
given to seed multiplication for building adequate stocks of
certified/quality seeds by providing foundation seed to

farmers.

For popularising newly developed varieties and promoting
seed production of these varieties, seed minikits of pioneering
seed varieties will be supplied to farmers. Seed exchange
among farmers and seed producers will be encouraged to

popularise new/non-traditional varieties.

Seeds of newly developed varieties must be made available
to farmers with minimum time gap. Seed producing agencies
will be encouraged to tie up with Research Institutions for

popularization and commercialization of these varieties.


2.13

2.14

2.15

2.16

11

As hybrids have the potential to improve plant vigour and
increase yield, support for production of hybrid seed will be

provided.

Seed production will be extended to agro-climatic zones
which are outside the traditional seed growing areas, in order

to avoid unremunerative seed farming in unsuitable areas.

Seed Banks will be established for stocking specified
quantities of seed of required crops/varieties for ensuring
timely and adequate supply of seeds to farmers during adverse
situations such as natural calamities, shortfalls in production,
etc. Seed Banks will be suitably strengthened with cold

storage and pest control facilities.

2.15.1 The storage of seed at the village level will be
encouraged to facilitate immediate availability of seeds in the
event of natural calamities and unforeseen situations. For the
storage of seeds at farm level, scientific storage structures will
be popularised and techniques of scientific storage of seeds

will be promoted among farmers as an extension practice.

Seed growers will be encouraged to avail of Seed Crop
Insurance to cover risk factors involved in production of seeds.
The Seed Crop Insurance Scheme will be reviewed so as to
provide effective risk cover to seed producers and will be
extended to all traditional and non-traditional areas covered

under the seed production programme.


3.1

3.2

12

QUALITY ASSURANCE

The Seeds Act will be revised to regulate the sale, import
and export of seeds and planting materials of agriculture crops
including fodder, green manure and horticulture and supply of
quality seeds and planting materials to farmers throughout the

country.

The National Seeds Board (NSB) will be established in place of
existing Central Seed Committee and Central Seed
Certification Board. The NSB will have permanent existence
with the responsibility of executing and implementing the
provisions of the Seeds Act and advising the Government on
all matters relating to seed planning and development. The

NSB will function as the apex body in the seed sector.

3.2.1 All varieties, both domestic and imported varieties, that
are placed on the market for sale and distribution of seeds and
planting materials will be registered under the Seeds Act.
However, for vegetable and ornamental crops a simple system
of varietal registration based on “breeders declaration” will be

adopted.

3.2.2 The Board will undertake registration of kinds/varieties of
seeds that are to be offered for sale in the market, on the basis
of identified parameters for establishing value for cultivation

and usage (VCU) through testing/trialling.

3.2.3 Registration of varieties will be granted for a fixed period

on the basis of multilocational trials to determine VCU over a


13

minimum period of three seasons, or as otherwise prescribed
as in the case of long duration crops and horticultural crops.
Samples of the material for registration will be sent to the
NBPGR for retention in the National Gene Bank.

3.2.4 Varieties that are in the market at the time of coming into
force of the revised Seeds Act, will have to be registered within
a fixed time period, and subjected to such testing as will be

notified.

3.2.5 The NSB will accredit ICAR, SAUs, public/private
organisations to conduct VCU trials of all varieties for the

purpose of registration as per prescribed standards.

3.2.6 The NSB will maintain the National Seeds Register
containing details of varieties that are registered. This will help
the Board to coordinate and assist activities of the States in

their efforts to provide quality seeds to farmers.

3.2.7 The NSB will prescribe minimum standards (of
germination, genetic characteristics, physical purity, seed
health, etc.) as well as suitable guidelines for registration of

seed and planting materials.

3.2.8 Provisional registration would be granted on the basis of
information filed by the applicant relating to trials over one
season to tide over the stipulation of testing over three

seasons before the grant of registration.


3.3

3.4

3.5

3.6

3.7

14

Government will have the right to exclude certain kinds or
varieties from registration to protect public order or human,
animal and plant life and health, or to avoid serious prejudice

to the environment.

The NSB will have the power to cancel the registration granted
to a variety if the registration has been obtained by
misrepresentation or concealment of essential data, the
variety is obsolete and has outlived its utility and if the
prevention of commercial exploitation of such variety is

necessary in the public interest.

Registration of Seed Processing Units will be required if such
Units meet the prescribed minimum standards for processing

the seed.

Seed Certification will continue to be voluntary. The
Certification tag/label will provide an assurance of quality to

the farmer.

3.6.1 The Board will accredit individuals or organisations to
carry out seed certification including self-certification on

fulfillment of criteria as prescribed.

To meet quality assurance requirements for export of seeds,
Seed Testing facilities will be established in conformity with

ISTA and OECD seed _ certification programmes.


3.8

3.9

3.10

3.11

15

The State Government, in conformity with guidelines and
standards specified by the Board, will establish one or more
State Seed Testing Laboratories or declare any Seed Testing
Laboratory in the Government or non-Government Sector as a
State Seed Testing Laboratory where analysis of seeds will be

carried out in the prescribed manner.

Farmers will be encouraged to use certified seeds to ensure

improved performance and output.

Farmers will retain their right to save, use, exchange, share or
sell their farm seeds and planting materials without any
restriction. They will be free to sell their seed on their own
premises or in the local market without any hindrance provided
that the seed is not branded. Farmers’ right to continue using
the varieties of their choice will not be infringed by the system

of compulsory registration.

Stringent measures would be taken to ensure the availability of
high quality of seeds and check the sale of spurious or

misbranded seeds.


4.1

4.2

4.3

4.4

4.5

16

SEED DISTRIBUTION AND MARKETING

The availability of high quality seeds to farmers through an
improved distribution system and efficient marketing set-up

will be ensured to facilitate greater security of seed supply.

For promoting efficient and timely distribution and marketing
of seed throughout the country, a supportive environment will
be provided to encourage expansion of the role of the private
seed sector. Efforts will be made to achieve better
coordination between State Governments to facilitate free
Inter-State movement of seed and planting material through

exemption of duties and taxes.

Private Seed Sector will be encouraged and motivated to
restructure and reorient their activities to cater to non-

traditional areas.

A mechanism will be established for collection and
dissemination of market intelligence regarding preference of

consumers and farmers.

A National Seed Grid will be established as a data-base for
monitoring of information on requirement of seed, _ its
production, distribution and preference of farmers on a

district-wise basis.


4.6

4.7

4.8

17

Access to term finance from Commercial Banks will be
facilitated for developing efficient seed distribution and

marketing facilities for growth of the seed sector.

Distribution and marketing of seed of any variety, for the
purpose of sowing and planting will be allowed only if the said

variety has been registered by the National Seeds Board.

National Seeds Board can direct a dealer to sell or distribute
seeds in a specified manner in a specified area if it is

considered necessary to the _ public _ interest.


5.1

5.2

5.3

5.4

5.5

5.6

5.7

18

INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITIES

To meet the enhanced requirement of quality/certified seeds,
creation of new _ infrastructure’ facilities along with

strengthening of existing facilities, will be promoted.

National Seed Research and Training Center will be set up to
impart training and build a knowledge base in various

disciplines of the seed sector.

The Central Seed Testing Laboratory will be established at the
National Seed Research and Training Center to perform

referral and other functions as required under the Seeds Act.

Seed processing capacity will be augmented to meet the

enhanced requirement of quality seed.

Modernisation of seed processing facilities will be encouraged
in terms of modern equipment and latest techniques, such as

seed treatment for enhancement of performance of seed, etc.

Conditioned storage for breeder and foundation seed and
aerated storage for certified seed would be created in different

regions.

A computerized National Seeds Grid will be established to
provide information on availability of different varieties of

seeds with production agencies, their location, quality etc.


5.8

5.9

19

This network will facilitate optimum utilisation of available

seeds in every region.

5.7.1 Initially, seed production agencies in the public sector
would be connected with the National Seed Grid, but
progressively the private sector will be encouraged to join the
Grid for providing a clear assessment of demand and supply of

seeds.

State Governments, or the National Seeds Board in
consultation with the concerned State Government, may

establish Seed Certification Agencies.

State Governments will establish appropriate systems for
effective execution and implementation of the objectives and

provisions of the Seeds Act.


6.1

6.2

6.3

6.4

6.5

20

TRANSGENIC PLANT VARIETIES

Biotechnology will play a vital role in the development of the
agriculture sector. This technology can be used not only to
develop new crops/varieties, which are tolerant to disease,
pests and abiotic stresses, but also to improve productivity

and nutritional quality of food.

All genetically engineered crops/varieties will be tested for
environment and bio-safety before their commercial release,
as per the regulations and guidelines of the Environment
Protection Act (EPA), 1986.

The EPA, 1986, read with the Rules, 1989 would
adequately address the safety aspects of transgenic
seeds/planting materials. A list will be generated from Indian
experience of transgenic cultivars that could be rated as

environmentally safe.

Seeds of transgenic plant varieties for research purposes will
be imported only through the National Bureau of Plant Genetic
Resources (NBPGR) as per the EPA, 1986.

Transgenic crops/varieties will be tested to determine their
agronomic value for at least two seasons under the All India
Coordinated Project Trials of ICAR, in coordination with the
tests for environment and bio-safety clearance as per the EPA

before any variety is commercially released in the market.


6.6

6.7

6.8

6.9

6.10

21

After the transgenic plant variety is commercially released, its
seed will be registered and marketed in the country as per the

provisions of the Seeds Act.

After commercial release of a transgenic plant variety, its
performance in the field, will be monitored for at least 3 to 5
years by the Ministry of Agriculture and State Departments of

Agriculture.

Transgenic varieties can be protected under the PVP
legislation in the same manner as non-transgenic varieties

after their release for commercial cultivation.

All seeds imported into the country will be required to be
accompanied by a certificate from the Competent Authority of
the exporting country regarding their transgenic character or

otherwise.

6.9.1 If the seed or planting material is a product of transgenic
manipulation, it will be allowed to be imported only with the
approval of the Genetic Engineering Approval Committee
(GEAC), set up under the EPA, 1986.

Packages containing transgenic seeds/planting materials, if
and when placed on sale, will carry a label indicating their
transgenic nature. The specific characteristics including the
agronomic/yield benefits, names of the transgenes and any

relevant information shall also be indicated on the label.


22

6.11 Emphasis will be placed on the development of infrastructure
for the testing, identification and evaluation of transgenic

planting materials in the country.


7.1

7.2

7.3

23

IMPORT OF SEEDS AND PLANTING MATERIAL

The objective of the import policy is to provide the best
planting material available anywhere in the world to Indian
farmers, to increase productivity, farm income and export
earnings, while ensuring that there is no deleterious effect on

environment, health and bio-safety.

7.1.1 While importing seeds and planting material, care will be
taken to ensure that there is absolutely no compromise on the
requirements under prevailing plant quarantine procedures, so
as to prevent entry into the country of exotic pests, diseases

and weeds detrimental to Indian agriculture.

7.1.2 All imports of seeds will require a permit granted by the
Plant Protection Advisor to the Government of India, which will

be issued within the minimum possible time frame.

All import of seeds and planting materials, etc. will be allowed
freely subject to EXIM Policy guidelines and the requirements
of the Plants, Fruits and Seeds (Regulation of import into India)
Order, 1989 as amended from time to time. Import of parental

lines of newly developed varieties will also be encouraged.

Seeds and planting materials imported for sale into the country
will have to meet minimum seed standards of seed health,

germination, genetic and physical purity as prescribed.


7.4

7.5

24

All importers will make available a small sample of the

imported seed to the Gene Bank maintained by NBPGR.

The existing policy, which permits free import of seeds of
vegetables, flowers and ornamental plants, cuttings, saplings
of flowers, tubers and bulbs of flowers by certain specified
categories of importers will continue. Tubers and bulbs of

flowers will be subjected to post-entry quarantine.

7.5.1 After the arrival of consignments at the port of entry,
quarantine checks would be undertaken; which may include
visual inspection, laboratory inspection, fumigation and grow-
out tests. For the purpose of these checks, samples will be

drawn and the tests will be conducted concurrently.


8.

8.1

25

EXPORT OF SEEDS

Given the diversity of agro-climatic conditions, strong seed production

infrastructure and market opportunities, India holds significant promise for export

8.2

of seeds.

Government will evolve a long term policy for export of seeds

with a view to raise India's share of global seed export from the

present level of less than 1% to 10% by the year 2020.

8.3 The export policy will specifically encourage custom production

of seeds for export and will be based on long term perspective,

dispensing with case to case consideration of proposals.

8.3

8.4

8.5

8.6

Establishment and strengthening of Seeds Export Promotion
Zones with special incentives from the Government will be

facilitated.

A data bank will be created to provide information on the
International Market and on export potential of Indian varieties

in different parts of the world.
A data base on availability of seeds of different crops to assess
impact of exports on domestic availability of seeds will be

created.

Promotional programmes to improve the quality of Indian

seeds to enhance its acceptability in the International Market will

be taken up.


26

8.7. Testing and certification facilities will be established in

conformity with international requirements.


9.1

9.2

9.3

9.4

9.5

27

PROMOTION OF DOMESTIC SEED INDUSTRY

Incentives will be provided to the domestic seed industry to
enable it to produce seeds of high yielding varieties and hybrid
seeds at a faster pace to meet the challenges of domestic

requirements.

Seed Industry will be provided with a congenial and liberalized
climate for increasing seed production and marketing, both

domestic and international.

Membership to International Organisations and Seed
Associations like ISTA, OECD, UPOV, ASSINSEL, WIPO, at the
National level or at the level of individual seed producing

agencies, will be encouraged.
Emphasis will be given to improving the quality of seed
produced and special efforts will be directed towards

improving the quality of farmers’ saved _ seeds.

Financial support for capital investment, working capital and

infrastructure strengthening will be facilitated through NABARD/

Commercial Banks/Cooperative Banks.

9.6

Tax rebate/concessions will be considered on the expenditure
incurred on in-house research and development of new
varieties and other seed related research aspects. In order to

develop a competitive seed market, the States will be


9.7

9.8

28

encouraged to remove unnecessary local taxation on sales of

seeds.

To encourage seed production in non-traditional areas
including backward areas, special incentives such as
transport subsidy will be provided to seed producing agencies

operating in these marginalised areas.

Reduction of import duty will be considered on machines and

equipment used for seed production and processing which are

otherwise not manufactured in the country.


10.

10.1

10.2

10.3

10.4

29

STRENGTHENING OF MONITORING SYSTEM

The Department of Agriculture & Cooperation (DAC) will
supervise the overall implementation and monitoring of the

National Seeds Policy.

The physical infrastructure in terms of office automation,
communication facilities, etc., in DAC will be augmented in a

time bound manner.

The technical capacity of DAC need to be augmented and
strengthened to undertake the additional work relating to
implementation of National Seeds Policy, implementation of
PVP&FR Bill, Seeds Act, Import and Export of Seeds, etc.

Capacity building, including National and International training
and participation in Seminars/Workshops will be organized for

concerned officials.


411.

30

CONCLUSION

CLUNVveYs

The Government of India trusts that the National Seeds Policy
will receive the fullest support of State Governments/Union
Territory Administrations, State Agricultural Universities, plant
breeders, seed producers, the seed industry and all other
stakeholders, SO that it may serve as a catalyst to meet the
objectives of sustainable development of agriculture, food and
nutritional security for the population, and improved standards

of living for farming communities.

The National Seeds Policy will be a vital instrument in attaining
the objectives of doubling food production and making India
hunger free. it is expected to provide the impetus for a new
revolution in Indian agriculture, based on an efficient system

for supply of seeds of the best quality to the cultivator.

The National Seeds Policy will lay the foundation for
comprehensive reforms in the seed sector. Significant
changes in the existing legislative framework will be effected
accompanied by programmatic interventions. The Policy will
also provide the parameters for the development of the seed
sector in the Tenth and subsequent Plans. The progress of
implementation of the Policy will be monitored by a High Level

Review Committee.
