NATIONAL NUTRITION POLICY
1993
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF WOMEN & CHILD DEVELOPMENT
NEW DELHI

CONTENTS
PAGE No.
I. Introduction 1
II. Need for a Nutrition Policy within the Development context 2-3
III. The Nutrition Status of India 3-7
IV. The Existing Policy Instruments for combating Malnutrition 7
V. Nutrition Policy Instruments 7-13
VI. Administration and Monitoring 13-14
INTERVENTION PROGRAMMES TO COMBAT MALNUTRITION 15-22

NATIONAL NUTRITION POLICY
I. Introduction
Widespread poverty resulting in chronic and persistent hunger is the single biggest scourge of
the developing world today. The physical expression of this continuously re-enacted tragedy is the
condition of under-nutrition which manifests itself among large sections of the poor, particularly
amongst the women and children. Under nutrition is a condition resulting from inadequate intake of
food or more essential nutrient(s) resulting in deterioration of physical growth and health. The
inadequacy is relative to the food & nutrients needed to maintain good health, provide for growth
and allow a choice of physical activity levels, including work levels, that are socially necessary. This
condition of under-nutrition, therefore, reduces work capacity and productivity amongst adults and
enhances mortality and morbidity amongst children. Such reduced productivity translates into
reduced earning capacity, leading to further poverty, and the vicious cycle goes on (figure 1 below).
The vicious cycle of Poverty
Poverty
Low earning
capacity Low intake of
food & Nutrients
Impaired
Productivity
Undernutrition
Repeated Insults from
Nutrition related
Small Body
diseases & infections
size of Adults
Stunted Dev. of Children
Figure-1
& Growth faltering
The nutritional status of a population is therefore critical to the development and well being
of a nation.
1

II. Need for a Nutrition Policy within the Development Context:
The need for a National Nutrition Policy is implicit in both the paramountcy of nutrition in
development as well as in the complexity of the problem. This general problem of under-nutrition
should be seen as a part of a larger set of processes that produces and consumes agricultural
commodities on farms, transforms them into food in the marketing sector and sells the food to
customers to satisfy nutritional, aesthetic and social needs. Within this set, there are three sub-sets of
issues, within the broad sectors of agriculture, food and nutrition, with various linkages among them.
In fact, the third subset, viz. Nutrition, is the net- result of the other two subsets (figure 2 below).
Politics
Urban
Rural Micro Policy
Intermediate
Resources
Land Market Prices
Labour
Income Knowledge
Water
Subsistence Farming Direct
Consumption
A F N
Feeding
Technology Processing Home Health
Environment
Biological Changing tastes Vulnerable
Groups
Chemical
Mechanical
Crop Choice
Figure 2
It is both possible as well as necessary to devise policy interventions for influencing the
working of these sets and thereby improving the nutritional status of the society. The nature of
linkages determine the fate of such interventions. The diagram above gives the various linkages of
these three sub-systems, determining the nutrition status of a society, and it underscores the complex
and multi-dimensional nature of the problem of nutrition. For instance, post independence India has
a proud record of achievement in food production. From being a deficit nation, depending on food
imports in the sixties, to having become surplus in foodgrains in the eighties, is a saga of concerted
agricultural research, extension work and development, resulting in a dramatic productivity increase.
And yet, from all accounts, endemic malnutrition and ill health resulting from malnutrition continue
to stalk the country. It is this stark reality that underscores the need for a nutrition policy. Increased
food production does not by itself necessarily ensure nutrition for all. According to the 1978—88
round of NSS, nearly 29.2% of India’s population is estimated to be below the defined poverty line.
While, at the macro-level, this group constitutes the nutritionally at risk population, even within this
group the women and the children represent nutritionally the most fragile and vulnerable sections.
This is the result of intra-household gender discrimination, which perpetuates the age old inequities.
2

All this emphasise the complexity of the problem and the need for tackling the Nutrition Policy
consciously and at several levels simultaneously. Mere economic development, or even the adequacy
of food at household levels, are no gurantees for a stable and satisfactory nutritional status. At the
same time, however, the overall development strategy of a country is likely to have a pronounced
bearing on what nutritional planning can accomplish. Therefore, the task is not merely in terms of
formulating a nutrition policy but also in terms of locating and grounding it in the overall
development strategy of the country. Nutrition has to be tackled independently, alongwith other
development issues. This is not all. The time dimension is also important. A Policy having a mere
long term effect, even if beneficial for the nutritionally at risk population, would not suffice. After
all, this group has too little to live on in the long run and has too much to die of in the short run.
Therefore, both short as well as long term strategies are called for, comprising both direct as well
as indirect interventions.
III. The Nutrition Status of India:
(A) The Aggregate Position Regarding Intake:
(1) Calorie & Protein Intake:- There has been a steady increase in aggregate consumption of
calories at household level (Table 2). During 1957-79, in urban areas, the aggregate intake levels of
protein were above the ICMR recommended level for all income groups except slum dwellers. Even
in rural areas, between 1975 and 1989, aggregate consumption levels of all groups taken together
were ‘higher than the recommended levels. In fact, time trends show that the average intake of
calories at the lowest income group had a definite increasing trend during the seventies (Graph 1).
However, there has not been a commensurate increase in consumption of proteins and
protected foods like fats and oils (Table 1). Dietary patterns have also remained largely unchanged
despite increase in caloric consumption. The bulk of calorie intake increase is ascribed to the intake
of cereals. Some disaggregate data regarding rural areas show the vulnerability of the landless
agricultural labour families even as late as in 1979 when the Green Revolution was well under way.
Drought years have witnessed marginal decreases in the aggregate consumption of proteins and high
energy foods (Table 1).
(2) Micro-nutrient Intake:- During 1975-79, in urban areas, aggregate intake levels of Iron were
above the ICMR recommended levels for all groups. For Vitamin “A”, however, deficiencies existed
among all groups except the High Income Groups.
(B) The Dis-aggregated Picture
Although, the NNMB reports regarding average household food consumption levels do not
point to any significant intake - shortfall except for Vit. “A”. these average figures actually mask the
real picture. According to a NNMB-NSSO Survey, even at an aggregate level in terms of monthly
household income, around 34% of household earn considerably less than the average food
expenditure of the sampled families (Figure 3: NNMB 1983-84 below:)
Figure 3. NNMB-NSSO Survey Data
NNMB-NSSO Survey Report* ` 73-80
‘Average’ per caput food expenditure/mensem (60%-70% of total Expenditure)
NNMB Survey (1988)** <` 60
Household per caput/mcnsem (in 34% of households)
Source:- *NNMB (1983-84)-p.6
**NNMB Interim Report of Repeat Survey (1988-89)
3

Thus, even though there has been a drop in the population below poverty line since 1960 (from
56.8% to 29.2% in 1987-88) in terms of numbers, a staggering 250 million people suffer from
varying degrees of malnutrition in India. There is, however, no doubt that the impressive gains of
the Green Revolution in terms of national food security and effective early warning systems have
eradicated famines and situations of extreme hunger and starvation. What still remain are different
degrees of chronic and endemic hunger which, in the context of prevailing patterns of intra-
household food distribution particularly in rural families, translate into a grave danger for the
nutrition status of women and children. This is the crux of the nutrition situation in India.
The major nutrition problems of India can be classified as follows:—
(1) Under-nutrition resulting in:
(a) Protein Energy Malnutrition (PEM);
(b) Iron deficiency;
(c) Iodine deficiency
(d) Vit. “A” deficiency.
(e) Low Birth Weight Children;
(2) Seasonal dimensions of Nutrition;
(3) Natural calamities & the landless.
(4) Market Distortion and Disinformation;
(5) urbanisation.
(6) Special Nutritional Problems of Hill People, Industrial Workers, Migrant Workers, and
other special categories;
(7) Problems of Overnutrition, overweight and obesity for a small section of urban
population.
For India and much of the Third World nutrition status is characterised by varying degrees of
undernutrition for women and children.
(1) (a) PEM: Protein Energy Malnutrition is the most widespread form of malnutrition
among pre-school children of our country. A majority of them suffer from varying
grades of malnutrition. As many as 43.8* per cent children suffer from moderate
degrees of PEM and 8.7* per cent suffer from severe extreme forms of
malnutrition. The prevalence of malnutrition in children as reported in various
survey reports is given in Table 4. Surveys conducted between 1975 and 1990
indicated that the percentage of normal children (for both the sexes pooled) has
increased from 5.9% to 9.9% while the moderate form of malnutrition declined
from 47.5% to 43.8%. The percentage of severely malnourished children declined
from 15% to 8.7% (Table 4). The child population of urban slums had the lowest
proportion of children with normal body weight and recorded the highest
proportion of severely malnourished children (Table 4). Between 1975 and 1990,
increase in the percentage of normal children was appreciable in all the States,
except Karnataka and Orissa, where the increase was marginal as shown in Table
4. The percentage of severely malnourished children in the States of Gujarat and
Madhya Pradesh failed to show any marked upward trend.
* NNMB, NIN (Table 4)
4

(b) Iron Deficiency: Nutritional Anaemia: Nutritional anaemia among the pre-
school children and expectant and nursing mothers is one of the major preventable
health problems in India. It has been estimated in various studies particularly
those conducted by NIN that roughly 56 per cent pre-school children and almost
50 per cent of the expectant mothers in the third trimester of pregnancy suffer
from iron deficiency, which is basically due to inadequate or poor absorption of
iron from a predominantly cereal-based diet. Low iron intake, coupled with
hookworm infestation and infections, further aggravates the problem. According
to NNMB Report of repeat surveys (1989-90), between 1975 and 1990, a
marginal decline of 1.8 mg/cu was observed in the mean Iron intake at an over
all level. During 1989-90, the intakes were above the RDI levels in only
Karnataka, Maharashtra, Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh.
(c) Iodine Deficiency Disorder: In India, nearly 40 million persons are estimated to
be suffering from goitre and 145 million are living in the known goitre endemic
regions. The prevalence of goitre in these endemic regions ranges from 1.5 per cent
in Assam (Cachar Distt.) to 68.6% in Mizoram. It is also estimated that 2.2 million
children are afflicted with cretinism and about 6.6 million are mildly retarded and
suffer from varied degrees of motor handicaps. It is estimated that iodine deficiency
also accounts for 90,000 still births and neo-natal deaths every year.
(d) Vitamin ‘A’ Deflccency: Nutritional blindness which affects over seven million
children in India per year results mainly ‘from the deficiency of Vitamin A.
coupled with protein energy malnutrition. In its severest form, it often results in
loss of vision and it has been estimated that around 60,000 children become blind
every year (Source: NIPCCD Situational Analysis of Children: March 1989: p42).
Vitamin A deficiency is assessed on the basis of conjuctival xerosis and Bitot’s
spot. A study of NNMB has indicated that, while there were no manifestations of
Vitamin A deficiency in infants, its prevalence increased with age (Table 5).
Further, a higher prevalence was seen in school age children in all the income
groups. In the urban areas it was the highest among slum children (7.8%),
followed by industrial. labour (6.3%), the midale income group (4.7%) and the
low income group (4.1%). According to NNMB (1990), in none of the States was
the average intake comparable to the recommended level.
(e) Prevalence of Low Birth Weight Children: The prevalence of low birth weight
children is still unacceptably high for India. The nutritional status of infants is
closely related to the maternal nutritional status during pregnancy and infancy. In
India, 30% of all the infants born are low birth weight babies (Weight less than
2500 gms.) and this pattern is almost constant since 1979. An ICMR study
reported that the average birth weight ranged between 2.5 and 2 kg. and the
prevalence of low birth weight ranged between 26 and 57 per cent in the urban
slums and 35 to 41 per cent in the rural communities. This is a matter of concern
since 90 per cent of the deaths occur among infants with birth weight below 2000
gms. Low birth weight was found to be connected with several factors such. as
age of the mother, maternal weight, weight gain during pregnancy, interpregnancy
interval, hacmoglobin less than 8 gms. per cent and maternal illiteracy.
Keeping in view the fact that birth weight is the most important determinant of
child survival and that the maternal nutritional status is the most decisive factor
5

in preventing low birth weight, the National Health Policy has set a goal of
bringing down, the incidence of low birth weight by 10 per cent and the present.
maternal mortality rate from existing rate of 4 per 1000 to 2 per 1000 live births
by 2000 A.D. It was found by the NNMB in 1989 that, in the State of Karnataka,
consumption of energy by women was the highest ie. 2992k calories, as compared
to that of other States viz. West Bengal (2580k calories) and Orissa (2468k
Calories). In the rest of the States, the consumption of calories was less than the
recommended 2400k calories.
Women face high risks of malnutrition and disease at all the three critical stages,
vii. infancy and childhood, adolescence and reproductive phase. Child mortality
rate figures show high rates for female children than their male counterparts
(Table 6). This is perhaps indicative of social prejudices leading to neglect of
female babies.
When girls attain adolescence, they go through a second spurt of growth and their
bodies grow much more rapidly to prepare them for child bearing. But,
unfortunately, the intake of nutrients during this period is significantly low, the
calories and protein gaps ranging from 300-400 calories and 2-22 gms. of protein
respectively. Table 7 gives the energy and protein intakes of males and females
of different age groups. It is seen that the daily intake of Vit. “A” by all age
groups, including child, adolescent and adult population, is very much lower than
the recommended level. The intake of iron is ‘also lower than the recommended
level in children of all age groups, adolescent girls and adult women.
(2) Seasonal Dimensions:- In the duality of the Indian situation, where high-yielding
modern agriculture co-exists with rain-fed subsistence farming, there are serious
seasonal dimensions of the nutrition question. In large parts of India. the rainy months
are the worst months for the rural, landless poor. This is when cultivation, deweeding,
ploughing and other works demand maximum energy from them, while food stocks at
home dwindle and market prices rise. These are again the months when water-borne
diseases are so frequent. This condition goes on aggravating till late October or even
November. These are the months of rural indebtedness and compulsive market
involvement of the landless and the small/marginal cultivators. When the first kharif
harvest arrives, the situation is no better with widespread distress sales by the small/
marginal farmers. All these make nutrition a casualty during this period. Seasonality of
employment in subsistence agriculture affects nutrition through the double jeopardy of
high energy demand of peak work seasons and fluctuation in household level food
availability, which tend to exacerbate differential food intake among men, women and
children. As a result, in very poor households, women & children may actually fall
below the survival line during lean periods.
(3) Natural calamities & Nutrition:- This same group of rural landless poor is most
vulnerable to droughts, floods and famines; As has been established in famine periods,
worst affected groups arc the landless agricultural labourers, artisans, craftsmen and
non-agricultural labourers in that order.
(4) Market Distortion & Disinformation:- A striking feature which has now been
established is that famines arc caused not so much by any real decline in food
availability as by a sudden erosion of purchasing power of these marginal groups who
compulsively depend on the market (landless labourers etc.). In fact lessons from all
6

over the world have proved that it is not any substantial food shortage, but the psychosis
of food shortage and the widespread belief regarding crop failure, that triggers off price
rise spirals resulting in major malnutrition situations.
(5) Urbanisation:- Under-nutrition in urban areas is a major area of concern. Studies by
NNMB have actually shown that the nutritional status of urban slum dwellers in India
is almost as bad as that of rural poor. This is borne out both by figures relating to intake
of food (Table 1) as well as intake of nutrients (Table 2 & 3). The deleterious effects
of rural urban movements on nutrition, in much of the third world, is quite well known.
The children of urban slum dwellers and of the urban informal sector arc nutritionally
the most fragile of all groups. Uncertainty of income and the absence of informal
nutritional support systems within society so common to rural areas of India, place many
of these families on the very edge of survival. The fallout of a spreading urban culture,
which encourages diversion of a high proportion of family expenditure to luxury goods
& entertainment, aggravates the situation. Poor sanitary conditions, acute respiratory
infections and communicable diseases characterize these urban settlements.
(6) There are some regional and occupational specificities of the problems of nutrition. The
nutritional imbalance of hill people engaged in very strenuous labour. the special
nutritional problemss of some categories of Industrial Workers and migrant workmen are
other examples which need a detailed and specific response.
(7) With the burgeoning size of Indian middle class, overnutrition with attendants of cardio
vascular problems and other health hazards are affecting large number of people
particularly in the cities.
IV. The Existing Policy Instruments for combating Malnutrition:
Till the end of the IV Plan. India’s main emphasis was on the aggregate growth of the economy
and reliance was placed on the percolation effects of growth. In the face of continuing poverty and
malnutrition, an alternative strategy of development, comprising a frontal attack on poverty,
unemployment and malnutrition, became a national priority from the beginning of the V Plan. This
shift in strategy has given rise to a number of interventions to increase the purchasing power of the
poor, to improve the provision of basic services to the poor and to devise a security system through
which the most vulnerable sections of the poor (viz. women and children) can be protected. The
various intervention programmes that we already have, are given In the Annexure-I.
V. Nutrition Policy Instruments:
The Strategy: Nutrition is a multi-scctoral issue and needs to be tackled at various levels.
Nutrition affects development as much as development affects nutrition. It is, therefore, important to
tackle the problem of nutrition both through direct nutrition intervention for specially vulnerable
groups as well as through various development policy instruments which will create conditions for
improved nutrition.
A. Direct Interventon-Short Term
(i) Nutrition Intervention for specially vulnerable groups:
(a) Expanding the Safety Net:- The Universal Immunization Programme, oral
Rehydration Therapy and the Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) have
had a considerable impact on child survival (IMR for 1989 stood at 91 per 1000)
7

anti extreme forms of malnutrition. The position, however, is that the silent form of
hunger and malnutrition continues with over 43.8% (1988-90)* children suffering
from moderate malnutrition and about 37.6% (1988-90)* from mild malnutrition.
Therefore,, while more children arc surviving’ today, an overwhelmingly large
number of them arc destined to remain much below their genetic potential. This is
the enormity of the demographic trap which faces us as we move towards the next
century. There is, therefore, an immediate imperative to substantially expand the,
Nutrition intervention net through ICDS so as to cover all vulnerable children in the
age group 0 to 6 years. Presently. India’s child population for 0-6 years is around
18% of the total population and, out of this, 30.76 million comprise the children
from the households living below the poverty line in rural areas. Presently ICDS
covers around 15.3 million children (most of them in the rural areas). It should be
our conscious policy to. cover the remaining 15.46 million children, who arc
nutritionally at risk, by extending ICDS to all the remaining 2388 blocks (5153
minus 2765 blocks existing) of the country by the year 2000.
*Source: Nutrition News Vol 12 No. 3 May 1991 (NIN)
(b) With the objective of reducing the incidence of severe and moderate malnutrition
by half by the year 2000 A.D. a concerted effort needs to be made to trigger
appropriate behavioural changes among the mothers. Improving growth monitoring
between the age group 0 to 3 years in particular, with closer involvement of the
mothers. is a key intervention. Presently, growth monitoring has become a one-
way process and the mothers, arc mere passive observers of the entire process.
This needs to be changed because, after all, nutrition management of the children
will have to be done by the mothers at home. Getting involved in the growth
monitoring of her child will give her a feeling of control over the child’s nutrition
process and, combined with adequate nutrition and health education, empower her
to manage the nutrition needs of her children effectively.
(c) Reaching the Adolescent Girls:- The Government’s recent initiative of including
the adolescent girl within ‘the ambit of ICDS should be intensified so that they
arc made ready for a safe motherhood, their nutritional status (including iron
supplementation in the body) is improved and they arc given some skill
upgradation training in home-based skills and covered by non-formal education,
particularly nutrition and, health education. All adolescent girls from poor families
should be covered through the ICDS by 2000 A.D. in all CD blocks of the country
and 50% of urban slums.
(d) Ensuring better coverage of expectant women:- In order to achieve a target of
10% incidence of low birth weight by 2000 A.D., such coverage should include
supplementary nutrition right from ‘1st trimester and should continue during the
major period of lactation, at least for the first one year after pregnancy.
(ii) Fortification of Essential Foods:- Essential food items shall be fortified with
appropriate nutrients, for example, salt with iodine and/or iron. However, given the
highly extensive and decentralised process of salt marketing in the country, there is the
need to identify a vehicle which can be better controlled. Research in iron fortification
of rice and other cereals should be intensified. The distribution of iodised salt should
cover all the population in endemic areas of the country to reduce the iodine deficiency
to below endemic levels.
8

(iii) Popularisation of Low Cost Nutritious Food:- Efforts to produce and popularise low-
cost nutritious foods from indigenous and locally available raw material shall be
intensified. It is necessary to involve women particularly in this activity.
(iv) Control of Micro-Nutrient Deficiencies amongst vulnerable Groups:- Deficiencies of
Vit. “A”, iron and folic acid and iodine among children, pregnant women. and nursing
mothers shall be controlled through intensified programmes. Iron supplementation to
adolescent girls shall be introduced. The- programme shall be expanded to cover all
eligible members of the community. The prophylaxis programme, at present, do not
cover all children. Far example, the Vit. “A” programme covers only 30 out of about 80
million. It is necessary to intensify all these efforts and work an o specific time frame.
Nutritional blindness should be completely eradicated by the year 2000 A.D. The
National Nutritional Anaemia Prophylaxis Programme should be extended and
strengthened to reduce anaemia in expectant women to 25% by 2000 A.D.
B. Indirect Policy Instruments: Long Term Institutional & Structural Changes:-
(i) Food Security: In order to ensure aggregate food security, a per capita availability of
215 kg/person/year of foodgrains needs to be attained. This requires production of 250
million tonnes of food grains per year by 2000 AD and buffer stocks of 30-35 million
tonnes in order to guard against exigencies, such as flood and draughts (Table 8).
However, taking into account the present trends and the possibility of improved
availability of non-cereal food items, there should be a target of at least attaining 230
Million tonnes food grains production by 2000 A.D. (Table 9).
(ii) Improvement of Dietary pattern through Production and Demonstration: Improving
the dietary pattern by promoting the production and increasing the per capita availability
of nutritionally rich foods. The production of pulses, oilseeds and other food craps will
be increased with a view to attaining, self sufficiency and building surplus and buffer
stacks. The production of protective food crops, such as vegetables, fruits, milk, meat,
fish and poultry, shall be augmented. Preference shall be given to growing foods, such
as millets, legumes, vegetables and fruits (carrots, green leafy vegetables, guava, papaya
and alma). Far this purpose, the latest and improved techniques shall be increasingly
applied, high-yielding varieties of food crops developed and extensively cultivated,
adequate extension services made available to farmers, wastage of food in transit and
storage reduced to the minimum, available food conserved and effectively utilised and
adequate buffer stocks built up. Certain imbalances and anomalies in our agricultural
policy need to be redressed immediately. Our Agricultural Policy has been hitherto
concerned with production exclusively and not nutrition, which is the ultimate end.
While the Green Revolution has largely remained a cereal revolution, with bias towards
wheat, coarse grains and pulses, which constitute the poor man’s staple & protein
requirements, have not received adequate attention. The prices of pulses, which were
below cereal, prices before the Green Revolution, are now almost double the price of
cereals. Our Food Policy should be consistent with our national nutritional needs and
this calls far the introduction of appropriate incentives, pricing and taxation policies.
(iii) Policies for Effecting Income Transfers so as to improve the entitlement package of
the rural and urban poor.
(a) Improving the purchasing power: Poverty alleviation programmes, like the
Integrated Rural Development Programme (IRDP) and employment generation
9

schemes like Jawahar Rozgar Yojana, Nehru Rozgar Yojana and DWCRA are to
be re-oriented and restructured to make a forceful dent on the purchasing power
of the lowest economic segments of the population. In all poverty alleviation
programmes, nutritional objectives shall be incorporated explicitly and the
nutritional benefits of income generation shall be taken for granted. Existing
programmes shall be scrutinized for their nutrition component. It is necessary to
improve the purchasing power of the landless and the rural and urban poor: by
implementing employment generation programmes so that additional employment
of at least 100 days is created for each rural landless family and employment
opportunities are created in urban areas for slum dwellers and the urban poor.
(b) Public Distribution System: Ensuring an equitable food distribution, through the
expansion of the public distribution system. The Public distribution system shall
ensure availability of essential food articles, such as coarse grains, pulses and
Jaggery, besides rice, wheat, sugar and oil; conveniently and at reasonable prices
to the public, particularly to those living below the poverty line, not only in urban
areas but throughout the country. For, this purpose. encouragement shall be given
to the consumer cooperatives and fair price shops shall be opened in adequate
number in all areas. Effective price and quality control shall he exercised over the
cooked foods in restaurants and other eating places.
The Public Distribution System should be strengthened especially during the
monsoon months for-giving special rations at specially subsidized rates for at least
four months (July - October) to the seasonally “at risk” population. The
beneficiaries of this programme should include landless labourers and their
families and the migrant labourers and their families.
(iv) Land Reforms: Implementing land reform measures so that the vulnerability of the
landless and the landed poor could be reduced. This will include both tenural reforms
s, well as implementation of ceiling laws.
(v) Health & Family Welfare: The health and family welfare programmes are an
inseparable part of the strategy. Through “Health for All by 2000 AD” programme,
increased health and immunisation facilities shall be provided to all. Improved pre-natal
and post-natal care to ensure safe motherhood shall be made accessible to all women..
The population in the reproductive age group shall be empowered, through education,
to be responsible for their own family size. Through intensive family welfare and
motivational measures; small family norm and adequate spacing shall be encouraged so
that the food available to the family is sufficient for proper nutrition of the members.
(vi) Basic Health and Nutrition Knowledge: Basic health and nutrition knowledge, with
special focus on wholesome infant feeding practices, shall be imparted to the people
extensively and effectively. Nutrition and health education concepts shall be effectively
integrated into the school curricula, as well as into all nutrition programmes. Nutrition and
Health Education are very important in the context of the problems of Overnutrition also.
(vii) Prevention of Food Adulteration: Prevention of food adulteration must be strengthened
by gearing up the enforcement machinery.
(viii) Nutrition Surveillance: Nutrition surveillance is another weak area requiring immediate
attention. The NNMB/NIN of ICMR nerds to be strengthened so that periodical
monitoring of the nutritional status of children, adolescent girls, and pregnant and
10

lactating mothers below the poverty fine takes place through representative samples and
results are transmitted to all agencies concerned. The NNMB should not, only try and
assess the impact of ongoing nutrition and development programmes but also serve as
an Early Warning System for initiating prompt action.
Since the Department of Women & Child Development is the nodal Department for
National Nutrition Policy, it is necessary for the NNMB to be accountable to this Deptt.
in so far as Nutrition Surveillance is concerned.
(ix) Monitoring of Nutrition Programmes: Monitoring of Nutrition Programmes (viz
ICDS), and of Nutrition Education and Demonstration by the Food & Nutrition Board,
through all its 67 centres & field units, should be continued. The transfer of Food &
Nutrition Board to the Department of Women & Child Development has already been
approved by the Prime Minister. This will ensure an integrated set up to deal with the
problem of nutrition with adequate technical & field level set up.
(x) Research: Research into various aspects of nutrition, both on the consumption side as
well as the supply side, is another essential aspect of the strategy. Research must
accurately identify those who are suffering from various degrees of malnutrition.
Research should enable selection of new varieties of food with high nutrition value
which can be within the purchasing power of the poor.
(xi) Equal Remuneration: Special efforts should be made to improve the effectiveness of
programmes related to women. The wages of women shall be at par with that of men
in order to improve women’s economic status. This requires a stricter enforcement of the
Equal Remuneration Act. Special emphasis will have to be given for expanding
employment opportunities for women.
(xii) Communication: Communication through established media is one of the most important
strategies to be adopted for the effective implementation of the Nutrition Policy. The
Department of Women. and Child Development will have a well-established, permanent
Communications Division, with adequate staff and fund support. While using the
communication tools, both mass communication as well as group or inter-personal
communication should be used. Not only the electronic media but also folk and print
media should be used extensively. The existing facilities in the Song and Drama Division’
and the Directorate of Advertising and Visual Publicity (DAVP) in the Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting could help in a big way to improve nutrition and health
education. To give ‘a new direction to communication and media, efforts will be made for
promoting sound feeding practices, which are culturally acceptable and based on local
food habits. Alongside the information gap, existing social attitudes and-prejudices,
inherent in our milieu, which discriminate against girls and, women and affect their health
and nutrition, need to be countered through educational programmes. Further, the media
policy shall focus on ways and means to combat malnutrition among girl children,
adolescent girls and women in the reproductive age group. Educational programmes will
be made meaningful and interesting to meet the growing needs of the population.
The role of information is crucial for nutrition. Such information is not only important
with regard to improved health and nutrition practices but can also have a vital influence
on the market, particularly during natural calamities, war etc. The role of information
during such exigencies is to ensure that the market remain stable without any panic
being created. This also needs to be carefully monitored.
11

(xiii) Minimum Wage Administration: Closely related to the market, is the need to ensure
an effective, minimum wage administration to ensure its strict enforcement and timely
revision and linking it with price rise through a suitable nutrition formula. A special
legislation should -be introduced for providing agricultural women labourers the
minimum support, and atleast 60 days leave by the employer in the last trimester of her
pregnancy. Excessive loss of energy during the working seasons has serious nutritional
implications. The legislation should take care of this problem also.
(xiv) Community Participation: The active involvement of the community is essential not
only in terms of being aware of the services available to the community but also for
deriving the maximum benefit from such services by giving timely feedback necessary
at all levels. After all, communication must form an essential part of all services and
people themselves are the best communicators.
Community participation will include:
(a) Generating awareness among the community regarding the National Nutrition
Policy and its major concerns;
(b) involving the community through their Panchayats or, where Panchayat do not
exist, through beneficiary committees in the management of nutrition programmes,
and interventions related to nutrition, such as employment generation, land
reforms, health, education etc.;
(c) actual participation, particularly of women, in food production and processing
activities,
(d) promoting schemes relating to kitchen gardens, food preservation, preparation of
weaning foods and other food processing units, both at the home level as well as
the community levels;. and
(e) Generation of effective demand at the level of the community for all services
relating to nutrition.
(xv) Education & Literacy: It has been shown that Education & Literacy particularly that
of women, is a key determinant for better nutritional status. For instance, Kerala State
which has the highest literacy level, also has the best nutrition status despite the fact that
calorie intake in Kerala is not the highest among all States in the country.
(xvi) Improvement of the Status of Women: The most effective way to implement Nutrition
with mainstream activities in Agriculture, Health, Education and Rural Development is
to focus on improving the status of women, particularly the economic status. After all,
women are the ultimate providers of nutrition to households both through acquisition of
food as well as preparation of food for consumption. There is evidence that women’s
employment does beneficial household nutrition, both through increase in household
income as well as through an increase in women’s status, autonomy and decision-
making power. Morever,. female education also has a strong inverse relationship with
IMR. Educated women have greater roles in household decision making, particularly
those relating to nutrition and feeding practices.
Therefore emphasis on women’s employment and education particularly nutrition and
health education should provide the bedrock of the nation’s nutritional intervention. If
a self sustaining development model is to be pursued in which the community is able
to manage its nutrition and health needs on its own. The socio-economic security of
women is sine qua non.
12

This underscores the importance of improving the employment status of women. The
groundswell of voluntary action created through the,National Literacy Mission should
be harnessed and channelised into the areas of child survival and nutrition.
VI. Administration and Monitoring
1. Implementation of National Nutrition Policy
(a) The measures enumerated above have to be administered by several ministries/
departments of the Government of India and various governmental and non-governmental
organisations. There should be a close collaboration between the Food Policy, the
Agricultural Policy, the Health Policy, the Education Policy, the Rural Development
Programme and the Nutrition Policy as each complements the other.
The NNP should immediately be translated into forceful, viable and realistic scctoral
action programmes. Special working groups-shall be constituted in the Deptts. of
Agriculture, Rural Development, Health, Education, Food and women & Child
Development to analyse the nutritional relevance of scctoral proposals and to
incorporate nutritional considerations in the light of the Nutrition Policy wherever
necessary. Each concerned Central Ministry shall implement the measures for which it
has direct or nodal responsibility.
(b) An Inter-Ministerial Co-ordination Committee will function in the Ministry of Human
Resource Development under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Department of Women and
Child Development, to oversee and review the implementation of nutrition intervention
measures. Sectoral Ministrics/Dcptts. concerned, like health and Family Welfare, Education
and Agriculture, Food and Civl supplies etc., will be represented on the Inter-Ministerial
Co-ordination Committee. The Committee will meet once or twice a year. The Co-
ordination Committee would be constituted with the scctoral representatives or
administrators essential for decision making on policy matters. To analyse, discuss and
resolve the technical issues and nutrition aspects of all plans and strategies during the
implementation stage, technical experts from concerned areas would be associatemembers.
(c) A National Nutrition Council will be constituted in the Planning Commission, with
Prime Minister as President. Members will include concerned Union Ministers, a few
State Ministers by rotation, and experts, and representatives of non-governmental
organisations. The Council will be the national forum for policy co-ordination, review
and direction at the national level. The Council will meet once a year. The National
Nutrition Council will be the highest body for overseeing the implementation of the
National Nutrition Policy through the various sectoral plans of action and will issue
policy guidelines based on latest nutritional surveillance feedback.
2. Monitoring of Nutrition situation: Nutritional surveillance of the country’s population
especially children and mothers, shall be the responsibility of the National Institute of Nutrition/
NNMB who in turn may involve the. National Institute of Health and Family Welfare, Central
Health Education Bureau, Home Science, Medical Colleges and NGOs. There shall be a
mechanism to utilize the services of Food/Nutrition Science and Medical graduates trained every
year, to manage the national nutrition programmes. NIN/NNMB should be accountable to the
Deptt. of Women & Child Development in so far as Nutrition surveillance. is concerned.
The paucity of reliable and comparable data from all parts of the country is a definite obstacle
towards a realistic and disaggregated problem definition. This calls for a nation-wide
13

monitoring system. To achieve this, it is necessary to restructure and strengthen the existing
National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau (NNMB) and to develop a mechanism for generating
nation-wide disaggregated data within a short period for use by the Centre and the States for
taking corrective action wherever necessary. This would ensure a ‘regular monitoring and
surveillance system and develop a reliable data base in the country not only to assess the
impact of on going nutrition and development programmes but also to serve as an early
warning system for initiating prompt action.
3. Role of State Governments: In a federal polity like ours, the cutting edge of governmental
interventions commences from the state level. Therefore, the successful actualisation of
Nutrition Policy is largely dependent on the effective role of the state Governments.
The formal structure at the State level should be similar to that envisaged under the
Government of India. There should be an apex State level nutrition council to be chaired by
the Chief Minister and to comprise concerned Minister of the State Government, representatives
of leading NGOs working in the state, experts and representatives of related professional
bodies. There should be an Inter-Departmental Coordinating Committee to function. under the
Chief Secretary which will coordinate, oversee and monitor the implementation of the National
Nutrition Policy. The Committee would also focus on the State level targets for the various
nutrition related indicators- based targets set under the NNP. The Secretary of the Department
dealing with women and children should be the convenor of this Committee.
Special working groups will be set in the Departments of Agriculture, Rural Development,
Health, Education, Food and Women and Child Development and this group will be
responsible for vetting the various sectoral schemes from the point of view of nutrition before
they are finalised.
4. Given the problem of mounting delivery cost of various nutrition interventions, it is necessary
to mobilise resources from within the community in order to ensure sustainability of these
interventions. This is a major area of concern and the State Governments, local bodies
(including Municipal and Panchayat bodies); NGOs, cooperatives and professional organisations
and pressure groups must take this up as a challenge. In a pluralistic society like ours, a
concerted effort by all of them is the only way to build community support and ultimately
community participation in these schemes. Successful examples of the community contributing
the nutrition component of ICDS Scheme exists in certain States. It is possible to replicate
these examples. Many State Governments have started a major mid-day meal programme
funded out of the State resources. The other State Governments/Union Territory Admns. may
also consider such an introduction in their primary and secondary schools. The private schools
and schools which are capable of mobilising their own resources may be encouraged to
introduce such schemes out of their own resources.
The State Governments may consider constituting similar bodies, i.e. State Co-ordination
Committees and State Nutrition Councils, as well as such bodies at the district levels.
In a massive country like India, with autonomous states, each with its characteristic problems,
priorities, approaches and resources, the state level nutrition policies would be better able to
deal with the problems. After the NNP of India is operationalised with specific objectives,
plans of action, strategies, targets and time frame, development of state- level policies shall be
encouraged.
14

ANNEXURE-I
INTERVENTION PROGRAMMES TO COMBAT MALNUTRITION
Integrated Child Development Services
1. The Government of India is making concerted efforts to reduce the prevalence of malnutrition
in the country. In consonance with this, the scheme of Integrated Child Development Services
(ICDS) was launched in 1975. This programme is implemented by the Nodal Department i.e.
the Department of Women and Child Development. Starting with 33 experimental projects in
1975-76, the ICDS programme has been expanded to 2765 projects upto December 1992. The
package of services provided to the beneficiaries of the programme are supplementary
nutrition, Immunization, Health check-up. Referral services, Non-formal pre-school education
and Nutrition and health Education. Supplementary nutrition is one of the major components
of the programmes. The coverage of beneficiaries for supplementary nutrition in ICDS as on
December 1992, arc as follows:
Children below 3 years : 69.40 lakhs
Children in the age group of 3-6 years : 83.13 lakhs
Women beneficiaries : 30.08 lakhs
The strategy adopted in ICDS is one of the Integrated delivery of early childhood services so
that their synergistic effect will fulfill the objective of the programme. The beneficiaries of the
programme arc children below 6 years, preggant and lactating mothers and women in the age
group 15- 44 years. This programme supplements the health, nutrition and family welfare
activities with appropriate cooperation and coordination between functionaries of the Health
Department and nodal department.
2. The other programmes in this direction are the Special Nutrition Programme, Balwadi
Nutrition Programme, Wheat Based Supplementary Nutrition Programme, Tamil Nadu
Integrated Nutrition Programme, Mid Day Meals Programme for school children and other
intervention programmes for combating specific nutritional Deficiency Diseases such as
Nutritional Anaemia Prophylaxis Programme, Goitre Control Programme and Programme for
Prevention of Nutritional Blindness due to Vitamin A Deficiency.
Special Nutrition Programme
3. The special Nutrition Programme (SNP) was launched in the country in 1970-71. It provides
supplementary feeding to the extent of about 300 calories and 10 gm. of proteins to pre-school
children and about 500 calories and 20 gm. of protein to expectant and nursing mothers for
15

300 days a year. At present SNP is operated, as a part of the Minimum Needs Programme in
the various states. The nutrition component of the ICDS programme is funded by States and
Union Territories from the SNP budget. At present about 21.5 million beneficiaries are covered
under this programme.
Balwadi Nutrition Programme
4. The Balwadi Nutrition Programme (BNP) is being ;mplemented since 1970-71 through five
national level voluntary organisations. The Central grant is given for supplementary feeding
of children. It consists of 300 Calories and 10 gm. of protein per child per day for 270 days
a year. During 1991-92, about 0.23 million children in the age group 3-5 years in 5640
balwadis were covered by the scheme.
Wheat Based Supplementary Nutrition Programme
5. A centrally sponsored scheme called Wheat-based Supplementary Nutrition Programme
(WNP) was introduced in 1986. This programme follows the norms of SNP or of the nutrition
component of the ICDS. Central assistance for the programme consists of supply of free wheat
and supportive costs for other ingredients, cooking, transport etc. At present around 3 million
children and expectant and nursing mothers arc covered under this programme. This scheme
is now being transferred to the State Sector.
Tamil Nadu Integrated Nutrition Programme
6. Tamil Nadu Integrated Nutrition Programme (TINP) is being implemented in the State of Tamil
Nadu since 1981. At present the scheme covers 316 blocks in Tamil Nadu. Under this project
nutritional surveillance and supplementary nutrition is being provided to children below six
years and expectant and nursing mothers. The project is assisted by World Bank. The total
outlay for the project is Rs. 321 crores.
Mid Day Meal Programme
7. In 1956 the erstwhile Madras State launched the mid-day meal programme of providing free
meal to the elementary school children with a view to (a) enrolling poor children who
generally remain outside the school due to poverty; and (b) giving one meal to the children
attending the school. The MDM operated as a Centrally sponsored scheme from 1962-63 in
all the states. The objectives were (a) to improve nutritional status of the school children; and
(b) to attract children to enroll themselves into school and to encourage regular attendance by
providing supplementary nutrition.
Nutritional Anaemia Prophylaxis Programme
8. Taking cognizance of this problem, the Government of India launched a Prophylaxis
programme in 1970 to prevent nutritional anaemia in mothers and children. Under the
programme, the expectant and nursing mothers as well as women acceptors of family planning
are given one tablet of iron and folic acid containing 60 mg elemental iron (180 mg of ferrous
sulphate and 0.5 mg of folic acid) and children in the age group 1-5 years arc given one tablet
of iron containing 20 mg elemental iron (60 mg of ferrous sulphate and 0.1 mg folic acid) daily
for a period of 100 days. This programme covered children and pregnant women with
haemoglobin level less than 8 gm per cent and 10 gm per cent respectively.
9. There has been an increase in the number of beneficiaries under this programme from 3.52
million in 1975-76 to 41.20 million in 1988-89. About 30 million women and 50 million
children have, however, been identified as eligible beneficiaries for the prophylaxis
16

programme. During 1988-89, the programme envisaged to cover 22 million women and 30
million children.
10. Fortification of salt with iron, a universally consumed dietary article, has been identified as a
measure to control anaemia. Efficacy of fortified salt in both rural and urban communities was
assessed by a multicentric study and revealed that iron fortified salt when consumed over a
period of 12-18 months reduced prevalence of anaemia significantly. Accordingly, fortification
of salt with iron as a public health approach is piloted in Tamil Nadu and Rajasthan.
Prophylaxis Programme Against Blindness Due to Vitamin A Deficiency
11. The programme was initiated by the Government in 1970. Under this programme children in age
group 1-5 years are given an oral dose of 0.2 million I.U. of Vitamin A in oil -every 6 months,
The number of beneficiaries covered under this programme has increased steadily from 4.48
million in 1975-76 to 30.12 million in 1986-87. It is hoped to achieve universal coverage of the
target population of about 50 million children in the age group 1—5 years by 1990.
12. An interim evaluation in the States of Kerala and Karnataka after two years of implementation
of the programme showed that the coverage was over 75 per cent and there was a 75 per cent
reduction in the prevalence of conjunctival signs of Vitamin A deficiency. The evaluation also
confirms the administrative feasibility of this approach within the existing health infrastructure.
13. During 1980, the Department of Food introduced a scheme of Fortification of Milk with
Vitamin A to prevent nutritional blindness. At present there arc 42 dairies in the country
implementing this scheme. During 1988-89, the total quantity of milk fortified with Vitamin
A through these dairies was 3.2 miltiorr litres per day.
14. MCII Division of the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has been implementing the
programmes on anaemia prophylaxis. and prophylaxis against Vitamin ‘A’ deficiency. These
programmes were reviewed by two groups of experts and accordingly certain modifications
have been made with concentrated efforts on all pregnant mothers receiving 100 tablets of Iron
Folic Acid and universalisation of Vitamin ‘A’ to be provided to all children between 9 months
and 3 years of age. The lactating women and those who have accepted certain family planning
devices will continue to get the drugs as per earliest schedule. Suitable linkages have also been
developed for these programmes with immunisation and arrangements have been made for
regular monitoring through the same programme.
Goitre Control Programme
15. A National Goitre Control Programme was initiated by thc Government of India in 1962 to
identify goitre endemic regions and to assess the impact of goitre control measures. The
availability and production of iodized salt, strengthening of administrative machinery
controlling the entry of non-iodized salt in the endemic regions have been recommended as
mcasurcs to improve the implcmentaion of the programme.
16. There is an increasing awareness about the broad spectrum of Iodine Deficiency Disorder
(IDD) in the country. The Goitre Control Programme has gained momentum in recent years.
The Government of India has started a scheme with effect from 1.4.1986 envisaging Universal
Iodisation of Edible Salt’ in a phased manner to cover the whole country by 1992. It has
liberalised production of iodized salt under the private sector by issuing license to 700 salt
manufacturers-out-of which 307 have commenced production. As a result thereof, the
production of iodised salt in the country has steadily increased to 25.06 lakh M.T. in 1990-91
from 7.72 lakh M.T. in 1986-87. Since the inception of this programme in 19 States/Union
17

Territories have so far established Goitre Control Cells in their State Health Directorates for
effective implementation and monitoring of the programme. Till date 20 States/UTs have
prohibited the sale of edible salt other than iodised salt in their respective States/ UTs under
the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act. The remaining States/UTs have been requested to
issue a similar ban expeditiously. The Siates/UTs have also been requested to arrange for
distribution of iodiscd salt’ through their Public Distribution System. It is estimated that about
200 million people will have to be protected against goitre by 2000 A.D.
National Diarrhoeal Diseases Control Programme
17. Thc programme was launched in 1981 to reduce the mortality in children below five years due
to diarrhoeal diseases through introduction of Oral Rchydcration Therapy (ORT). The high
priority accorded to the Programme is part of the package of services rendered under the MCH
programme which was initiated during 1980-855 has now been strengthened extensively. The
Anganwadi Centres of the ICDS Scheme have served as nucleus for the propagation of Oral
Rchydration Therapy (ORT) which has been found to be an effective measure of preventing
dehydration caused by diarrhoea.
Functions of the Food & Nutrition Board
18. The Food & Nutrition Board’, as reconstituted on 26 July 1990, advises Government,
coordinates and reviews the activities in regard to food and nutrition, extcnsion/education;
development, production & popularisation of nutritious Foods and Beverages; measures
required to combat deficiency diseases; and conservation and efficient utilisation as well as
augmentation of food resources by way of food preservation and processing.
2600 GRAPH I
2400
2200
2000
1800
1600
Graph-I Calorie intakes in different income groups druing 1975—81.
SOURCE:- NUTRITION PROFILE IN INDIA OVER A DECADE:
N. Prahlad Rao & J. Gaurinath Sastri, National Institute of Nutrition. “Towards the
implementation of a National Nutrition Policy in India.” Pub: ICMR, 1986
)UC
/
LACK(
SEIROLAC
3-5
2-5
1-2
less than
AC-1
75 76 77 78 79 80 81
18

TABLE 1: Average intake of food stuffs (g/cu/day) in urban and rural areas
Food Urban - 1975-79 Rural Least
Cost
HIG MIG LIG IL SD 1975 L976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 19821988-89 Balanced
Diet
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15) (16)
Cereals 316 361 428 420 416 641 633 614 617 570 613 553 498 521 460
Pulses 57 49 42 41 33 32 43 34 36 37 33 35 30 37 40
Leafy Vegetables 21 21 16 13 11 11 12 11 14 13 14 14 23 14 40
Other Vegetables 113 89 55 56 40 51 51 58 56 58 75 51 53 53 60
Milk 424 250 95 98 42 80 103 88 66 90 88 70 78 88 150
Fats and Oils 46 35 22 23 13 9 11 12 9 12 10 9 10 14 40
Recommended by ICMR (1981) for adult sedentary male HIG - High Income Group
MIG - Middle Income Group
LIG - Low Income Group
IL - Industrial Labour
SD - Slum Dwellers
(i) National Institute of Nutrition. National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau, Report on Urban Population. Hyderabad. 1984.
(ii) National Institute of Nutrition. National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau. Report of the year 1981. 1982, Hyderabad.
(iii) National Institute of Nutrition. Nutrition News 7(2). March 1986. Hyderabad.
(iv) National Institute of Nutrition, National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau, Intrim Report of Repeat Survey. Phase-I. 1989.
TABLE 2: Average intake of nutrients (per/cu/day)
RDA Urban Rural
ICMR 1975-79
(1981) 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1982 1983*1988-89
Nutrients HIG MIG LIG IL SD
Calories 2400 2603 2364 2230 2243 2008 2296 2369 2306 2341 2366 2404 2409 2243 2481 2419
(K Cal)
Proteins 55.0 73.4 63.2 57.8 59.4 53.4 63.6 65.4 61.9 62.6 62.3 62.3 64.4 58.7 63.8 64.5
(g)
Iron 24.0 27.3 26.7 26.5 26.3 24.9 31-8 31.4 29.3 31.1 30.3 29.6 31.7 30.4 31.1 30.5
(mg)
Vit. A 750 881 555 332 352 248 263 292 262 307 270 313 373 366 300 352
(µ.g. Retinol)
* During 1983; the surveys were conducted on a sub-sample of NSSO in only 4 states RDA - Recommended Dietary
Allowance.
Source:(i) National Institute of Nutrition, National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau, Report on Urban Population,
Hyderabad, 1984.
(ii) National Institute of Nutrition, National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau, Report of the year 1981, 1982,
Hyderabad. National Institute of Nutrition, Nutrition. News 8(6), Nov. 1987, Hyderabad.
(iii) India. Ministry of Planning, Central Statistical Organisation, Second Seminar on Social Statistics, February
4-6, 1988. New Delhi, 1988.
(iv) National Institute of Nutrition, National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau, Interim Report of Repeat Survey,
Phase-I. 1989.
19

TABLE: 3 Intake of Nutrients in different Demographic Groups
No Land Less then 5-10 More than Labourers Cultivators others
5 Acres Acres 10 Acres
Calories (Per consumer unit per day)
Kerala 1824 1904 2232 1589 1718 2040 2015
Tamil Nadu 2108 2320 2671 2718 2012 2548 2321
Karnataka 2312 2576 2860 3099 2338 2901 2526
Andhra Pradesh 2274 2480 2824 2974 2358 2805 2338
Maharashtra 2006 2178 2251 2517 1948 2413 2150
Gujarat 1999 2042 2234 2444 1941 2219 2097
Madhya Pradesh 1977 1939 2108 2403 1905 2221 2059
West Bengal 1866 2346 3055 3052 1806 2.543 2414
Uttar Pradesh 1991 2116 2227 2377 2000 2192 2043
(gm per consumer unit per day)
Kerala 44.2 44.3 57.5 34.6 37.7 49.3 49.0
Tamil Nadu 52.3 56.6 66.7 67.2 49.6 62.4 57.7
Karnataka 63.3 65.3 76.3 86.5 63.2 77.0 67.0
Andhra Pradesh 53.8 59.7 72.3 74.3 55.7 70.4 55.9
Maharashtra 58.8 62.5 65.7 73.8 57.5 70.3 62.3
Gujarat 57.2 60.1 64.5 70.6 56.9 65.0 58.0
Madhya Pradesh 58.0 59.9 67.1 74.5 57.3 69.5 61.5
West Bengal 48.7 59.2 76.3 75.2 46.7 63.3 61.3.
Uttar Pradesh 64.2 66.2 73.9 77.7. 64.4 69.9 65.1
Source:Annual Report (1979) of National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau, National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad,
Reported by Rajaram Dasgupta, Economic & Political Weekly, Vol. XVIII No. 28, July 9, 1983.
TABLE-4 : PERCENT DISTRIBUTION OF CHILDREN
(1-5 YEARS) ACCORDING TO NUTRITIONAL GRADES*
State Period n Normal Mild Moderate Severe
Kerala 1975-79 737 7.5 35.7 46.5 10.3
1988-90 882 17.7 47.4 32.9 2.0
Tamil Nadu 1975-79 1183 6.2 34.2 47.0 12.6
1988-90 3337 8.0 42.0 45.8 4.2
Karnataka 1975-79 1065 4.6 31.1 50.0 14.3
1988-90 2035 4.8 38.1 48.8 8.3
Andhra Pradesh 1975-79 809 6.1 32.4 46.1 15.4
1988-90 2838 8.7 39.5 44.3 7.5
Maharashtra 1975-79 760 3.2 25.4 49.5 21.9
1988-90 1666 6.7 38.0 47.5 7.8
Gujarat 1975-79 718 3.8 28.1 54.3 13.8
1988-90 1262 7.3 33.9 45.8 13.0
Madhya Pradesh 1975-79 585 8.4 30.3 45.1 16.2
1988-90 237 17.7 27.4 38.9 16.0
Orissa 1970-79 571 7.5 35.9 41.7 14.9
1988-90 1175 8.1 34.6 46.6 10.7
Pooled 1975-79 6428 5.9 31.6 47.5 15.0
1988-90 13432 9.9 37.6 43.8 8.7
*Based on NCHS standards
Source:National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau Report of Repeat.Surveys (1988-90) published by National Institute of
Nutrition. Indian Council of Medical research, Hyderabad.
20

Table 5 : Incidence of Bitot’s spot among children in rural
areas (percentage)
Year pre-school children School going children
(1-5 years) (5-14 years)
1975 0.6 1.7
1976 1.4 4.1
1977-78 1.4 4.2
1979 0.9 1.3
1980 1.5 3.1
1981 2.7 5.1
1982 1.8 3.1
Figures indicated are the median values of the prevalence levels in the surveyed states.
Sources : Rao, N. Pralahad and Gowrinath, S.J. Diet and Nutrition Profile in Ten States of India over a Decade in the
implementation of a National Nutrition Policy in India, October 28-30, 1985, Srinagar.
Table- 6: Child Mortality rate (0-4 yes.) by sex and rural urban residence
Years Rural Urban Combined
Male Female Pers. Male Female Pers. Male Female Pers.
1971 53.2 59.3 56.2 31.1 33.3 32.2 53.2 59.3 51.9
1981 43.1 48.0 45.5 20.0 20.9 20.4 39.2 43.3 41.2
1982 42 45.7 43.9 21.2 20.5 20.9 31.9 40.5 39.1
1983 40. 43.1 41.8 21.1 21.7 21.4 36.5 38.7 37.6
1984 44.2 49.2 46.2 22.6 23.8 23.2 39.5 43.0 41.2
1985 41.4 45.3 43.3 19.4 22.1 20.7 36.6 40.4 38.4
1986 36.6 43.3 40.8 - 20.3 21.5 20.9 34.7 38.6 36.6
Source:- India, Office of the Registrar General, Vital Statistics Division, Sample Registration System, 1971, 1981-1986.
Table-7: Energy and Protein istake by Males and Females of Different Age Groups
Age Group Energy, Kcal / d Protein, g / d
R D A Intake R D A Intake
female male female male female male female male
Children
1-3 Yeas 1050 1200 773 780 22.5 23.5 21.9 22.0
4-6 years 1500 1700 1097 1112 28.5 30.0 30.9 31.5
7-9 years 1800 2050 1320 1325 43.0 43.0 36.0 39.0
10-12 years 1950 2150 1483 1550 62.0 59.0 41.0 42.9
Adolescents
13-15 years 2050 2400 1620 1773 65.0 76.0 42.9 49.1
16-18 years 2050 2600 1721 1937 66.0 81.0 47.7 58.6
Adults 1800 2350 1789 2169 50.0 60.0 50.4 62.0
(sedentary)
Intake based on NNMB Survey in 10 States, 1975-80
21

Table 8: Crop production perfomance and production Projections for
1989-90 1994-95 and 2000 A.D.
Crop 1988-89 1989-90 1994-95 2000
Act, Ach Target Projections Projections
(million Tonnes)
1. Foodgaines
i) Rice 70.47 72.50 88.0 106.0
ii) Wheat 54.12 54.00 67.0 80.0
iii) Coarse Gains 32.65 34.00 37.0 42.0
iv) Pulses 14.92 14.50 18.0 22.0
Total 172.16 175.00 210.0 250.0
2. Oilseeds 17.50 18.00 22.5 27.0
3. Sugarcane 210.00 217.00 270.0 320.0
Source: Ministry of Food & Civil Supplies, Food and Nutrition Board, Department of Food,
National Workshop on Dietary and Nutritional Guidelines for food and agriculture
planning, October 4-6, 1989, New Delhi.
Table-9 CURRENT LEVEL OF PRODUCTION 1988-89 AND
PROJECTIONS FOR 2000 A.D.
The demand and supply balances for 2000 AD in respect of commodities shown below
alongwith production figures for 1988-89.
Sl. Items Production** Demand*** Supply***
No. in 1988-89 (Million Tonnes) (Milliom
(Million Tonnes) Tonnes)
Low High
1. Total Foodgrains 170.25 205 225 230
Cereals 156.55 195
Pulses 13.70 35
2. Oils - 8.3 10.2 9.7
(Oilseeds equivalent) 17.88 - - (26.0)
3. Milk 49.10 49.4 64.4 64.40
4. Meat N.A. 1.57 2.11 2.10
5. Eggs (million nos.) 18,666 17,419 28,513 27,882
6. Fish 3.15 4.6 5.5 8.0
7. Vegetables N.A. 50.00 55.00 N.A.
8. Fruits N.A. N.A. N.A. N.A.
N.A. - Not Available
Comments:
1. The nutritional needs require consumption of vegetables of 200 gm per adult per day. The requirement
would be 55 million tonnes of vegetables considering the potential for internal demand as well as
for export, production could be planned for 80 million tonnes for vegetables for 2000 AD on an area
of 4 million hectares, assuming an average target yield of 20 tonnes per hectare.
2. The total production of oils from field crops and other sources i.e. exploitation of cotton seed,
rice bran, maize, coconut, oil palm etc. is estimated at 9.7 million tonnes in 2000 A.D.
Source: **Annual Report 1989-90, Deptt. of Agriculture, Govt. of India.
***Report of the National Commission on Agriculture, 1976 (abridged) Ministry of
Agriculture, Govt. of India, New Delhi.
22