No. 238/9/2018-Wind
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
Wind Energy Division .
Atal Akshaya Urja Bhawan, Lodhi Road, New Delhi-110003

Dated: 7 December, 2023

CIRCULAR

Subject: National Repowering & Life Extension Policy for Wind Power Projects
- reg.

Ministry of New & Renewable Energy had issued ‘Policy for Repowering of the
Wind Power Projects’ on 5th August 2016. Based on the stakeholders’ consultation,
the policy has been revised in order to enable repowering/replacement of older
generation turbines with newer generation more efficient turbines and refurbishment
of wind turbines for life extension beyond design life subject to safety and performance
assessment as per relevant standards.

2. In supersession to the ‘Policy for Repowering of the Wind Power Projects’ dated
Sth August 2016, the Ministry hereby issues ‘National Repowering & Life Extension
Policy for Wind Power Projects -2023’ (attached).

(Dr. Rahul Rawat)
Scientist ‘C’
To,
All Concerned.


NATIONAL REPOWERING & LIFE EXTENSION POLICY FOR WIND POWER
PROJECTS

1. Introduction

India started harnessing Wind power in the late eighties backed by indigenous
manufacturing industry which has shown consistent progress since its inception. The
share of Wind power in the total installed capacity mix in the country has also
increased from 21.1 GW as on March 2014 to 44.29 GW as on October 2023.

The Wind turbine generator technology has evolved over these years and individual
rated capacities of Wind turbines have increased from sub MW scale to multi MW
scale. Most of the Wind-turbines installed in India up to the year 2000 are of sub MW
capacity and are at sites having high Wind energy potential. Some of the old Wind
turbines have already completed their design life while some are approaching the
end of their design life. These Wind turbines are not only inefficient in comparison to
the latest technology but also have lower hub heights (in the range of 30- 60m) in
comparison to hub heights of 120-140 m range being installed now. In order to
optimally utilize the Wind energy resource available at the respective sites it felt
necessary to formulate a policy to enable these old wind energy turbines to be
repowered or refurbished with technological advancements to increase its
operational life and efficiency, while considering due safety aspects.

The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy had issued ‘Policy for repowering of the
Wind Power Projects’ on 5th August 2016 in order to create a facilitative framework
for repowering. A review of the policy has been carried out taking into account
representations received from various stakeholders, subsequent deliberations and
stakeholders’ consultation and a revised policy has been prepared. This policy
enables repowering/replacement of older generation turbines with newer generation
more efficient turbines even before the design life is over, if the developers/owners
choose to do so. The revised policy considers refurbishment of wind turbines for life
extension beyond design life subject to safety and performance assessment as per
relevant standards. Refurbishment may be done by suitable modifications in the
turbine components such as gearbox, blades, generator, controller etc.

2. Repowering Potential

Total
Capacity
below 2 MW

=|

National Institute of Wind Energy has estimated repowering potential of the country
details of repowering potential are as under:
Total Total Total Total
below 0.5| between between between
MW 0.5-1 MW | 1-1.5MW | 1.5-2 MW
1068 1389 731.35 3431.35
amataka 1417.05 | 3023.35

to be 25.406 GW considering Wind turbines below capacity 2 MW. The state wise
Capacity | Capacity Capacity Capacity
1181 2919 1813 1473.5 7386.5
oh Page 1of11

~



1457 1352 1805.35 4665.35
1192 914.9 2933.9

A

Madhya 290 260 1012 1562
paws | | | LP

Kerala [0 [a J 3] a]

Prades u“

~

Pradesh

Total | 1606.3 | 8276_ | 6449 | 9065.35 | 25396.65 |

National Institute of Wind Energy will issue a repowering potential map of the country
considering below 2 MW capacity Wind turbines.

=|

3. Title and Enforcement

This policy will be known as the ‘National Repowering & Life Extension Policy for
Wind Power Projects — 2023’. The policy is being issued in super-session of ‘Policy
for Repowering of the Wind Power Projects’ issued on 5th August 2016 and will be
effective from the date of issuance.

4, Objective

The objective of the repowering & life extension policy is optimum utilization of Wind
energy resource by maximizing energy (kWh) yield per sq.km of the project area and
utilizing the latest state-of-the art onshore Wind turbine technologies.

5. Eligibility

This policy lays out conditions for developers to go for repowering or refurbishment
for ensuring life extension of old Wind turbines. The following Wind turbines are
eligible for repowering/refurbishment under the policy:

i. All Wind turbines which are not in compliance with the quality control order
issued by this Ministry; or

ii. | have completed their design life as certified under the Type Test Certificate in
accordance with the applicable relevant standards; or

iii. | The Wind turbines of rated capacity below 2 MW;

iv. Based on commercial/voluntary consideration after 15 years of installation.

Note: Wind turbines which are to be replaced within the period of its design life
due to malfunctioning, issues in workmanship, safety etc., shall also require to be
repowered or refurbished.

6. Repowering/Refurbished Project

A repowering/refurbished project is a project which satisfies one or more of the
eligibility conditions mentioned at clause 5 above and the annual energy generation

<u eh d . Page 2 of 11


of the repowered/refurbished wind project is enhanced by at least 1.5 times as
compared to actual generation of the old wind power project;

Note: For the purpose of arriving at the actual generation of the old wind power
project, the actual average generation for the last three years (from the date of
disconnection from the grid) before which the project was taken for
repowering/refurbishment will be considered and such repowered/refurbished project
shall satisfy the above condition within a maximum period of 3 years from the date of
commissioning.

A repowering project can be classified into two categories:
i. Standalone Project — A Wind power project having a single or group of Wind
turbines owned by a single entity

ii Aggregation Project — A Wind power project having a group of Wind turbines
owned by multiple owners with shared common infrastructure.

In case the project owner opts for life extension of the wind turbines, then in such a
case the refurbishment carried out for ensuring life extension shall be considered
under the category of standalone project.

7. Implementation Arrangements

The repowering or refurbishment projects would be implemented through the
respective State Nodal Agency/Organization involved in promotion of Wind energy in
the State or the Central Nodal Agency appointed by the Central Government.

(i) Standalone Project

a. Project owner may submit the Detailed Project Report (DPR) for
repowering/refurbishment the old project to concerned SNA/CNA for
verification; or

b. State Nodal Agencies (SNAs)/Central Nodal Agency (CNA) shall also identify
the potential turbines for repowering and elicit interest from the potential
Project Owner to submit the DPR.

c. The refurbishment of turbines for ensuring life extension shall be done by the
developer with the consent from SNA. The turbine shall be assessed and
certified by the certification agency for quality and safe operation. The
assessment of the turbines shall be carried out as per the UL 4143: Wind
Turbine Generator Lifetime Extension standard or any such standards issued
by the BIS. Subsequent to the assessment a separate type certificate or
extension of the previous type certificate shall be issued by the certification
body. In no case, the total operational life of the refurbished turbines shall
exceed 40 years from the date of commissioning.

d. Based on the DPR, the SNA/CNA will coordinate with the respective STU/
CTU for availability/ augmentation of the transmission capacity. The additional
transmission augmentation shall be provided by the respective STU/CTU as
per available provisions/schemes, if required. Developer shall issue a notice

a any cee Page 3 of 11


to CTU/STU 2 (two) years in advance for enhancing the transmission capacity
as per the proposed repowered capacity of the wind power project.
Appropriate transmission charges shall be payable as per the prevailing
regulations.

e. On scrutiny of the project, transmission capacity availability and availability of
in principle consent of the incumbent DISCOM, SNA/CNA shall provide
consent letter to Project Owner/Developer.

f. A Notice of the repowering shall be sent to committee being set up under
Para 8 including DPR. After examining the repowering process, the committee
will grant a moratorium on supply of power under the PPA for the period of
repowering up to maximum 02 years.

(ii) Aggregation Project

In case of aggregation projects, the following modalities shall be adopted for
development of the repowering projects;

a. SNAs/CNA may identify the potential turbines for repowering. In such cases
SNAs/CNA either nominate any State/Central PSEs as Wind Repowering
Project Aggregators (WRPA) to repower the project or elicit interest from
private developers for the same. The selection of the private developer as
WRPA shall be through a transparent mechanism based on minimum
technical & financial criteria. The indicative parameters for selection of WRPA
may include Quality Assurance Certificate, Financial turnover, Experience,
Repowering plan, Old asset evaluation, Consent agreement from the
existing owners, Indication of land rights arrangement, Asset disposal plan
etc.

b. Amongst the existing owners of wind power projects any one owner/developer
may act as WRPA with or without partnership with other project developer.
The proposing owner shall identify potential turbines for repowering and
submit a proposal to the SNAs/CNA along with consent letters from all the
identified turbine owners.

« Responsibilities of WRPA:

a. Preparation of a detailed project report (DPR) for land acquisition and
development of the site for repowering project.

b. Acquisition/ leasing/ purchase of additional land, if required.

c. Obtaining clearance from state/ centre or any other concerned agency for
decommissioning/ development of the project.

d. Acquisition of all assets at the site including Wind turbine and associated
equipment, internal transmission infrastructure, land and power evacuation
rights, compensate asset owners for their future loss of revenue for the
balance life of the project, if any. The valuation of such functional/non-
functional projects assets shall be done in accordance with the standard
market practices. In this regard an indicative methodology for valuation of

assets is given at Annex.
Cal y : Page 4 of 11


e.

WRPA shall also be responsible for decommissioning of the existing assets,
removal, and lawful disposal of all scrap from the site, including disposal of
the Wind turbine blades. The turbine blades shall be disposed as per the
applicable norms of MoEFCC and CPCB/ SPCB and a certificate from
appropriate authority need to be produced to that effect.

Prepare the site without any encumbrances for development of Wind project
as if it is a Greenfield project.

Procedure followed shall be as follows:

Note:

WRPA shall submit the Detailed Project Report to concerned SNA/CNA.

Based on the DPR, the SNA/CNA shall coordinate with the respective
STU/CTU for availability/ augmentation of the transmission capacity, if
required, and facilitate the acquisition of additional land, if required. The
additional transmission augmentation shall be provided by the respective
STU/CTU as per available provisions/schemes, if required. Developer shall
issue a notice to CTU/STU 2 (two) years in advance for enhancing the
transmission capacity as per the proposed repowered capacity of the wind
power project. Appropriate transmission charges shall be payable as per the
prevailing regulations.

On scrutiny of the project and transmission capacity availability, SNA/CNA
shall provide consent letter to concerned WRPA after obtaining in principle
conseni of the incumbent DISCOM.

The repowering may be carried out by the WRPA either through open bids or
by themselves on EPC basis. A Notice of the repowering shall be sent to
committee being set up under Para 8 including DPR. After examining the
repowering process, the committee will grant a moratorium on supply of
power under the PPA for the period of repowering up to maximum 02 years.

In case of In-STS connected Wind turbines, SNA shall identify the potential
turbines for repowering/refurbishment and carry out required activities as
mentioned above.

In case of ISTS connected Wind turbines, CNA shall identify the potential
turbines for repowering/refurbishment and carry out required activities as
mentioned above.

8. Repowering Implementation Framework

Within one month of announcement of this policy, MNRE shall appoint a monitoring
and advisory committee (named as “Wind Repowering Committee (WRC)”) in
accordance with the provisions of this policy to assist MNRE in implementation of the
Repowering/Refurbishment Policy. The broad terms of reference of the WRC will
include the following;

To act as a bridge between industry stakeholders and state/central Govt.
organizations
To facilitate the ministry in effective implementation of the repowering

policy
oh 4 , Page 5 of 11


To recommend specific policy/regulatory interventions in order to realize
the repowering potential.

To monitor the progress of various repowering/refurbishment projects
under this policy.

The Members of the Committee shall include:

i.
if.
iii.
iv.

Vv.

Joint Secretary (Wind), MNRE - Chairman

Representatives of IREDA, SECI — Member

Representative of Central Transmission Utility - Member

Three independent experts from Wind sector -Member (to be nominated by
MNRE)

Representative of NIWE — Member Secretary

The committee will co-opt members from the respective state while taking up
specific issues on repowering/refurbishment project of a particular state.

9. Arrangement for Power Purchase

a.

The power generated corresponding to average of last three years
generation (measured at metering point) prior to repowering/refurbishment
would continue to be procured as per the terms of PPA in-force till the tenure
of the PPA.

The existing PPA tenure shall be extended by a period equal to the
repowering/refurbishment or a period of maximum period of two (2) years
excluding Force Majeure events whichever is lower.

Incumbent DISCOM shall neither have any right over the additional power
generated nor shall have any obligation to purchase the additional power
generated after repowering/refurbishment.

The additional power generated can be sold by the developer/owner as per
his will — in the power exchange, or through bilateral agreement or by entering
into short/medium/ long term PPA as per the existing laws/rules. There will be
no obligation to compulsorily supply the power to any DISCOM/procurer at
any fixed rates.

. A Wind farm/turbine undergoing repowering/refurbishment would be

exempted from supplying Power to the Purchasing entity (DISCOM) during
the period of execution of repowering on the recommendation of the
committee set up under para 8, subject to that the repowering period shall not
exceed 2 years excluding Force Majeure events from the date of consent
letter issued by CNA/SNA.

The DISCOMs/PPA owners will be given at least 1 year notice before the
repowering work begins by the developer, so that they can tie up alternate
sources of power for the intervening period.

The old PPA can be terminated with mutual consent.

tals .

Page 6 of 11


10. Benefits/Incentives:

i. REC/PFC/IREDA will provide loans for repowering on the same terms and
conditions as laid down for new projects.

ii. In addition, for repowering projects Indian Renewable Energy Development
Agency (IREDA) will provide an additional interest rate rebate of 0.25% over
and above the interest rate available to the new Wind projects being financed
by IREDA. IREDA may also devise a suitable financial product catering to
debt financing for repowering of wind power projects.

ii. All fiscal and financial benefits available to the new Wind projects shall be
available to the repowering project as per applicable conditions.

iv. The developer will have the liberty for micro siting based on an optimized
energy output.

11. Data Management

i. NIWE shall create and maintain a project data base of all old projects with
relevant information about the project such as ownership, technology, turbine
details, connected SS, land ownership etc.

ii. | NIWE shall also collect performance related data for all the sites and analyse
to identify poor performing sites for repowering/refurbishment in accordance
with the quality control order.

ii. © SNAs/CNA along with SLDCs shall provide all necessary data to NIWE for
this purpose

iv. NIWE shall coordinate with SNAs/CNA and maintain data of decommissioned
projects which shall be updated on quarterly basis.

12. Project Commissioning Schedule:

The repowering/refurbishment projects shall be commissioned within a period of 24
(twenty-four) months from the date of consent letter from CNA/SNA or consumer
entity. Part commissioning and early commissioning of the project shall be allowed.

13. Power to amend and review

If any difficulty arises in giving effect to any provision of this Policy or interpretation of
the Policy or modification to the Policy, Ministry of New & Renewable Energy is
empowered to do the same, with the approval of Minister, New & Renewable
Energy. Further, Ministry of New & Renewable Energy may review the policy from
time to time to ensure effective implementation of this policy.

eg.

Page 7 of 11


Annex

It is noted that the PPAs for Wind power projects are generally signed for long time
period (20/25 years) or renewed up to 25 years on short term basis (1 or 2 years). In
such cases, the existing owners deciding to go for repowering may be losing the
‘future revenue from their projects. Such potential financial loss needs to be
compensated. In addition, Wind Repowering Project Aggregator (WRPA) would incur
cost on decommissioning and disposal of the old Wind assets. The said cost may be
partly compensated by the income from sale of scrap material. Accordingly, following
equations may be considered for ‘Repowering Site Preparation Cost (RSPC)’.

RSPC = Terminal Valuation + Decommissioning Cost — Income from sale of
scrap material

Where:
Terminal Valuation = PPA Value + PPA Termination Incentive

“PPA value” can be estimated as an amount equal to the Net Present Value (NPV)
of net revenue from the anticipated generation in the remaining years (as per PPA).

PPA value = NPV of ye + Gy) -— (OM)

k=1
wherein;

t = Tariff as per PPA in case of sale to DISCOM or third party. In case of
captive consumption, tariff as per tariff order(s) of the appropriate commission
for the year commissioning of project may be considered. In case of absence
of both PPA and tariff order, a nominal tariff such as APPC of the concerned
state for the project may be considered.

G= Average annual generation may be calculated by taking the average of
energy delivered in last three (3) years at the delivery point (as defined in the
PPA) or at SS level.

OM= Annual O& M cost (OM) may be considered as per SERC/CERC tariff
Orders. In case of absence of the appropriate SERC/CERC tariff orders O&M
expenses for the first year of the control period shall be 2% of the wind turbine
original capital cost (CAPEX) and shall be escalated at the rate of 5% per
annum over the tariff period.

n = No of remaining years for completion of PPA

PPA Termination Incentive means the incentive provided to the asset owner over
and above the PPA value. The rate of incentive will be as mutually agreed by both
the parties, preferably 10 % of PPA Value.

Page 8 of 11


Decommissioning cost would include costs associated with dismantling Wind
turbines, site clearance and disposal of blades.

Decommissioning cost = DS +SC+ DB
Wherein;

DS = Cost incurred for dismantling Wind turbine
SC = Cost incurred for clearing the site

DB = Cost incurred for disposal of blades.

Income from sale of scrap material may be considered on the basis of
SERC/CERC tariff orders. In case of absence of appropriate order, the income shall
be assumed to be 10% of the original capital cost.

ely.

Page 9 of 11


Indicative Valuation Model

(Model, Costs and calculations given below are indicative only and may not be
considered as benchmark.)

Assumptions:

Project Type: Sale to Utility
Type of Turbine: 1000 KW

PLF: 12.3%

Annual Generation: 1077480 kWh
O & M Expense: 9 Lakhs

O & M Escalation: 5%

PPA Tariff (t): 3.00 (INR/kWh)
Escalation rate for Decommissioning Cost: 3%
Discount Rate for NPV: 10%

PPA Termination Incentive: 10% of PPA Value

24 e

1077.4) 1077.4

27.64

Expected

revenue

(For last 10

ear of PPA 16 Yr 17% Yr 18 Yr} 19h Yr, 20! Yr] 24st yr) 2209 Yr) 234 Yr

Annual Generatio p A | 1077.4|1077.4| 1077.4| 1077.4| 1077.4] 1077.4] 1077.4) 1077.4
nin
O&M 18.71] 19.65 20.63] 21.66 22.74 23.88] 25.07| 26.33
INR Lakhs
Revenue C=t*A 32.32] 32.32} 32.321 32.32] 32.32} 32.32) 32.32| 32.32
INR Lakhs
Net Revenue D=C-B 13.61] 12.68] 11.70] 10.66
ENR teists) Lakhs

es ee
PPA 10

PPA Value @ 10
% discount rate 59.42| 51.75] 44.241 36.97/ 30.00] 23.42) 17.32} 11.80

— I

|
Decommissioning
cost 25.00} 25.751 26.52} 27.32! 28.14) 28.98) 29.85} 30.75) 31.67
INR Lakhs
Income from sale
50.00! 50.00} 50.00) 50.00} 50.00) 50.00) 50.00} 50.00

of scrap
Page 10 of 11

32.32

Qi] Nh
Nl ©
wl o
No | ©

4.6

od
@
oO

THe

98

&
o
o

S

0.3

oO

PPA Value + PPA
Termination Incent

7.6

a

50.00

ol wo
lo) No
fo) fon)
Oo Le]

INR Lakhs



(INR Lakhs)= PPA
Value + Terminati

ion Inc. + Income fr
om Scrap - Deco
mmissioning

J=G+I-H mre 81.17) 72. ian 54.86], 46.78) 39. Eoin 20.68

Page 11 of 11
