v 7
No. AV.13030/34/2012-DT

Government of India
* .Ministry of Civil Aviation: -

Rajiv Gandhi Bhawan,
- ‘New Delhi — 110 003
”_ Dated the 4" March, 2014

ORDER -:
In supersession of the existing Order No. . AV 11012/2/94-A dated
4° March, 1994 and in exercise of powers conferred by sub-rule 1(A) of rule 134
of Aircraft Rules, 1937, the Central Government, with a view to achieving better
regulation of air transport services and taking into account the need for air
transport services of different regions and remote areas in the. country, hereby
direct that every operator operating air transport services, shall be required to
provide a minimum of air transport services to-designated remote & strategic
areas as well as within the areas so designated in the ‘Policy on Regional and
Remote Area ‘Air Connectivity’. dated the 3" March, 2014, annexed herewith.
DGCA and Airport Operators shall take necessary steps for the implementation
of the Policy. Airport Operators will provide necessary concessions / assistance
at the listed ‘airports as per the provisions of the Policy. Issues concerning
State Governments and Ministry .of, Defence shall be taken up to provide the
concessions / services / facilities at their airports as envisaged in the policy.

py

Ce (Anil-Srivastava)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India . |
mT ~ — Tel:.24610386

2


1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

1.5

3a

Government of India -
Ministry of Civil Aviation :
(AV.13030/34/2012-DT)

36 2s Ag 5

ee a . Dated 3" March, 2014

Policy on Regional and Remote Aréa Air Connectivity

Introduction
Regional Air Connectivity is the provision of air transport services to under-served
and un-served markets (towns / cities) with potential, providing connectivity both
within a Region as well as between Regions.

Remote Air Connectivity is the provision of air transport: services -to areas not
adequately connected’ through surface” transportation — including parts‘ of the

‘country with difficult terrain, including a areas that need to be connected for strategic

reasons.

With a view to achieving better air regulation of air. transport-services and taking -

into account the need for air transport services’ to, different regions in the country,

_ the Government. issued’ Route Dispersal Guidelines (RDGs) i in March 1994, These

Guidelines mandated 10% of. capacity deployed,on certain routes to be deployed on
routes in identified remote areas, and 1% in ‘the intra-remote regions. The remote
regions identified were the entire ‘North-East, J&K, Port Blair and Lakshadweep.

The airlines meet this obligation by operating to stations in these areas. It is seen
that some stations in these areas have developed, with passenger load factor of
about 80% or above. ;

RDGs have certainly. provided initial irnpetus to air connectivity to remote areas,
but to take air connectivity. to further. remote areas where necessary infrastructure
has been created and to un-served and underserved | areas, it is necessary that new

measures be. taken to encourage airlines to'increase flights to such airports. In --
addition, there are areas.in the country which need to,be connected due to their

potential for tourism, industrialization and other strategic purposes. It is therefore

necessary to lay down fresh guidelines to- ensure remote ‘and regional areas

connectivity.

The aim of the Aviation Policy on remote and regional air connectivity is to
encourage’ airlines and’ other operators to.’ éperate to such airports where
infrastructure has’. been made available for: operations, -by offering certain
incentives, and thereby reducing viability gap, if any for such operations.

‘ :


2.1

2.2

2.3

2.4

2.5

wy

Incentives to operate to Airports Identified for enhancing Air
Connectivity

Airports have been identified ‘where. incentives will be, provided to airlines for
operation. These are strategically important or remote locations that ought to be
made accessible as part of public policy, even if services do’ not appéar to be
financially viable at present. The list of these airports at Annex-I is indicative and
subject to revision from time to time. The list also ‘includes a few civil.enclaves of
airports under the control of muinarys where ‘airport charges for some services are
levied by Ministry of Defence.” rn

The following concessions will be provided to any passenger or cargo aircrafts
which operate to these airports in the: ‘ist in Annex-l,, for an ‘initial period of three
years:

a) Exemption from landing and parking charges; RNFC charges, PSF, Fuel
Throughput charges, and any other charges levied by AAI;

_b) Airlines. i Operators will. be allowed to do. ‘self ground handling during

operations at these airports;

c) Ministry of Defence would be requested to give similar concessions under their
control; and sons

Based on the traffic criteria anid: the numbet of aircrafts operated, AAI will identify.
airports wheré such: concessions would be made available throughout the year and
those where concessions would be allowed with seasonal variations.

The, concessions stated in 2.2 shall’ be ‘available to. scheduiled / non-scheduled
airlines / operators and who operate as per. “schedule for passéngers’/ public. Other
aircraft operators shall not be entitled to ‘these concessions and would have to pay
the specified charges. ©

Necessary amendments in the guidelines for “scheduled and non-scheduled
operators will: be made and non-scheduled- operators ‘will be, allowed to publish the
time table of the flights operated by them and also for flights for which they code-
share with scheduled airlines.


3.2

3.3

3.4

3.5

3.6

Mandatory Operations to Remote Areas |

In order to discharge the responsibility of providing connectivity to remote areas, it
will be mandatory for all scheduled airlines to operate at least 6% of their total
domestic operating capacity to airports in remote. or strategic areas. In the event of
any liberalized scheme permitting international routes, Government could consider
imposing proportionate obligatory operations on mandatory routes. Areas } airports
where operations are mandated are: .

a) All airports in North-East Region. with the exception of Guwahati and
Bagdogra;

b) All airports in j RK with the exception of Jammu;
c) All airports in Andaman and Nicobar islands; and

d) Lakshadweep. So , ) -

It will be mandatory for airlines to operate at least 1% of their total operating
capacity on sectors/routes operated within the above areas. For the purpose’of this
calculation ‘and for internal ‘connectivity, operations to and from Guwahati,
Bagdogara, Jammu and within Andaman & Nicober will also be included.

The total operating capacity as referred to in. 3. l-and 3.2, means the number of
seats operated by an airline in all its sectors (except flights to / from main land to

_remote areas mentioned in a and b para 3.1 above) multiplied by sector distance in

Kilometers (ASKM)._ To, rs
These areas [ airports shall be reviewed from time.to time.and may be revised to
ensure that flights to designated remote areas are not reduced. :

Performance of the airlines’ operations with respect to capacity deployment in
terms of | ‘available seat-kilometers’ (ASKMs) ' will be monitored by DGCA ona

monthly basis.

Appropriate action such as proportionate reduction i in seat allocation etc. shall be

initiated against airlines not complying with t these Tequirements in accordance with -

‘the provisions of the Aircraft Rules... Foe


4.2

"already provided by AAL/ Ministry of Defence: '

Role of State Governments in Improving. Air Connectivity

State Governments are important stakeholders in improving ait connectivity in their
respective strategic / remote areas, and at airports which are under their control and
where they have provided infrastructure for air operations. The State Governments
will be asked to provide the following services / facilities at these airports if not

a) Security and fire-fighting services;

b) Reduced VAT on fuel uplifted from viithin the State;
c) Infrastructure for proper access to airports; : . >
d) Waiver of duty on electricity charges; /

e). Waiver of municipal charges such’ as House Tax / Property: Tax etc. for 5 years;

f) Underwriting of seats.

The development of an airport in strategic / remote areas by AAI will be guided by

_ the support -provided by State Governments -undertaking the steps listed in 4.1 .

above. . ;

An air connectivity fund may be established as a long term measure to provide
necessary financial support.to promote, air’ connectivity to remote and strategic
areas. The size of the fund, tenure- and the institutionalized mechanism to
administer the fund shall be as separately notified by the Government.

bos

" }


ANNEX-1

LIST OF AIRPORTS IDENTIFIED FOR: PROVIDING CONCESSIONS

’

I. Regional Airports - _ AAI -

1)
2)
3)

4)

5)

29)

IL Regional Airports - State Governments/ther agencies

Kuddapah (Andhra)
Akola (Maha)
Gondia (Maha) -
Jalgaon (Maha)
Sholapur (Maha) ”
Keshod (Gujarat)
Porbandar (Gujarat)
Bhavnagar (Gujarat)
Coochbihar (WB). -
Kota (Rajasthan)
Shimla (HP)

Gaggal/Dharamshala (HP) an - _ Loe

Bhuntar/Kulu (HP) -

Bilaspur (Chhattisgarh)

Jabalpur(MP)

Deoghar (Jharkhand) -

Tuticorin (TN) sR
Jharsuguda (Orissa): ° pot
Ludhinana (Punjab) _ a

Gaya (Bihar) .

Mysore (Karnataka)

Belgaum (Karnataka)

‘Hubli (Karnataka) ae

Puducherry. .
Hubli (West Bengal)
Rajkot (Gujrat)
Nanded (Maharashtra)
Ludhiana (Punjab)
Nasik (Maharashtra) |

Sagar (MP)

Bareilley (UP) .°
Meerut (UP)
Karnal (Haryana)
Diu (SG/Coast Guard)
Jamishedpur (Jharkhand) - Tata, °


Ill. Regional Airports Civil Enclaves 7 ot

1) Gwalior (MP) .

2) Pathankot (Punjab) o
3)  Bhatinda(Punjab) = - Woo.
4) Bikaner (Rajasthan) -

5) Jaisalmer (Rajasthan) -

6) Jamnagar (Guj arat)

7) Kanpur (UP)-

8) Allahabad (UP):

IV. Remote/Strategic Area Airports

1) All airports in North- East States except ‘Guwahati & Bagdogra
2) All airports in Jammu & Kashmir except Jammu

3) Airport in Lakshadweep

4) Airports in Andaman and Nicobar Islands
