wio.2.28020/30/2003-CH
Government 0 India
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
Department of Family Welfare
CHILD HEALTH DIVISION

res ee

Nirman Bhawan, New Delhi.
Dated the on" November 2006.
To ‘ole

1) The Secretary, Department of Health of All States/UTS
2) The Secretary, artment of Family Welfare of All States/UTS.

6) The Coun Representative, Chanakyapuri, New Delhi.
7) The Country Representative. yropean Union, Chanakyapuri, New Delhi.

Subject: Vitamin A & IFA Supplementation -Regarding -

Sir,

,am directed to SAY that the Government of India for quite some time has beer examining
the issues 0 the policy decisions 00 the Vitamin A Supplementation Programme for the
Children in the Country, 44 has also been reconsidering the recommendations of the
WHO, UNICEF and Ministry of Women & Child Development, in this aspect. It has
been now decided to administer Vitamin A Supplement to all children nine months
to five years of age. 4 Policy Note on the subject 18 also enclosed herewith. As such,
you may indly take further needful and necessary action in the matter please.

This issue with the approval of Secgetanyc (Health ,& F amily Welfare)

Yours faithfurly,
(Smt P Sengup’’

Under Secretary (CHS
Tel No.2306387 4

Copy also for snformation to:

1. Secretary, Ministry of Women & Child Development, Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi.
2. DG, ICMR, Ansari Nagar, Ring Road, New Delhi.

3. Sr. Adviset (Health), Planning Commission Yojana Bhawan, New Delhi.

4. Adviset (Nutrition), DGHS, Nirman hawan, New Delhi.

| ( Sal She
“ a Sy)


Vi

~ One dose oy 100,009 IU to infants, 6-1] months),
1 S dose of 200,000 1ty to children 1-5 years Of age.
. Treatment of Vitamin A deficient Cases
“Single Oral dose of 200,000 IU of Vitamin A immediately at diagnosis
-Follow UP dose of 200,000 IU, one four Weeks later,

Vitamin A deficiency has been TeCOgnized to bea Major Controllable Public health
and Nutritional Problem, An estimated 5 7% children in India Suffer from CY€ signs of

Vitamin eficien Vidence SUgests thar even mild Vitam deficienc
Probably INCreases orbidity Nd mort lity j children, Phasizing the public health
imp fe) Sord. ational] Prophylax; P. me for vention of
Blindness due to y nA De ICienc Prophylax; Prog Me comprises a lon

a t .
administration Of mega doses of Vitamin
long term ultimate Solution to the Problem of Vitamin A deficiency

Vitamin A Supplementation IS to be implemented through the Primary Health
Centers its Sub centers and the anganwadis All health Staff Working with the Prim
ealth Centers are Tesponsible for administering Vitamin Concentrates '0 children

under 5 ye im § nutrition education S€rvices Integrateg Child
velopment Services(ICDg me, und artment Men and Ch Id
velopment, Ministry of We] ©, 1S Utilized T the distribution of vit A to Children
In the Ic B Or education of e Prevention f famin A
eficienc

Mothers ang by ars
© mothers atte antenata] Clinics Munization Sessions as
Well as m €rs and ch Idren enrolled in th ME are to be


pulse to a weaning child to be promoted widely. In addition, whenever
economically feasible, consumption of milk , cheese, paneer,
dahi(yoghurt), ghee, eggs, liver etc. is to be promoted.

¢ For increasing availability of vitamin A rich food, growing of vitamin A
rich food, growing of vitamin A rich foods in home gardens and
consumption of these must be promoted.

ii) ADMINISTERING SUPPLEMENTAL DOSE OF VITAMIN A

e Unlike most other micronutrients, vitamin A is stored in the body for
prolonged periods and hence periodic administration of massive dose
ensures adequate vitamin A.

¢ Administration of supplemental dose of vitamin A to pre school children
at periodic intervals is a simple, effective and most direct intervention
strategy. This is a short term strategy.

¢ Under this strategy, every infant 6-11 months and children 1-5 years is to
be administered vitamin A every 6 months. The recommended schedule is

as follows:
6-11 months - one doze of 100,000 IU
1-5 years - 200,000 IU/6 months
A child must receive aa total of 9 oral doses of vitamin A by its
firth birthday.

e The contact with an infant during administration of measles vaccine
between the age of 9-12 months is considered a practical time for
administering the vitamin A supplement — 100,000 IU for infants.

e A biannual approach may be used for administering vitamin A to children
1-3 years and 3-5n years. However, the DPT/OPV booster in mid-second
year to a child is a suitable time for the second dose of vitamin A
(200,000 IU). Wherever, ICDS Programme is functioning, AWW should
be involved in the distribution and administration of Vitamin A.

e The joint Mother-Child Health Card should be used to record and
monitor the administration of vitamin A dose to children under to years.

¢ In addition, records of under-fives maintained under the MCH Services
and the ICDS Programme, is recommended to be used for identifying as
well as monitoring children for administration of a total of 9 oral doses of
vitamin A per child.

¢ Communication strategy for creating awareness about Vitamin A must be
in place.

B. TREATMENT OF VITAMIN A DEFICIENT CHILDREN

* Mild deficiency of vitamin A leas to night blindness and conjunctival
lesions, while more severe deficiency results in corneal damage. The term
*Xerophthalmia’ is used to indicate the various types of ey lesions that
result from vitamin A deficiency.


Loss of luster, haziness and dryness are characteristics of corneal xerosis.
This can be completely reversed with vitamin A therapy but in untreated
cases it progresses rapidly to keratomalacia( “wasting” of cornea) and
blindness.

Recurrent infections and parasitic infestations aggravate vitamin A
deficiency, absorption, storage and utilization of vitamin A is adversely
affected in such condition. Keratomalacia is often preceded by an episode
of diarrhoea or respiratory infection. Measles is another important
contributory cause of vitamin A deficiency and childhood blindness.

Night blindness and conjunctival changes(such as Bitot’s sports) and
corneal xerosis /ulceration are indication for immediate vitamin A
Supplementaton. Corneal damage due to vitamin A deficiency(chanes in
the normally clear central part of the eye) threatens sight and is a medical
emergency.

All children with clinical signs of vitamin A deficiency must be treated as
early as possible. Treatment schedule is to administer 200,000 IU of
vitamin A immediately after diagnosis. This must be followed by another
dose of 200,000 IU 1-4 weeks later.

Children with eye lesions must be treated immediately with vitamin A
even if they are being referred for special care.

Infants and young children suffering from diarrhoea, measles or acute
respiratory infection must be monitored closely and encouraged to
consume vitamin A rich food. In case, early signs of vitamin A deficiency
are observed, the above treatment schedule must be followed.

C. CONCENTRATED VITAMIN A SOLUTION — IMPORTANT GUIDELINES

Vitamin A concentrate is available at primary health centers and sub
health centers in the form of flavored syrup at a concentration of 100,000
IU/ml or 100,000 TU / capsule.

Vitamin A syrup should be administered using the 2 ml. Spoon/dispenser
provided with each bottle of vitamin A. A marked level full 2 ml spoon
of vitamin A contains 200,000 IU vitamin A.

Vitamin A solution must be kept away from direct sunlight . It should be
stored in a cold dark room temperature is stable for a minimum of one
year.

Vitamin A solution bottle once opened must be utilized within 6-8 weeks.
