

Draft Policy to Catalyze Research & Development and
Innovation in the Pharma- MedTech Sector in India
1. Preamble
The pharmaceutical and medical devices sectors in India have shown
impressive growth over the years. Globally, India Pharmaceutical sector has
contributed significantly to improve health outcomes while the Indian Medical
Devices sector is well poised to pursue its constant growing trajectory. The
Government is committed to promote Indian Pharma-Medtech as globally
competitive sectors to ensure availability, accessibility and affordability of
drugs and medical devices in domestic and global markets. One of the key
policy measures to achieve this objective is to increase attention in India to
Research & Development and innovation, which accounts for 2/3rd of the global
pharmaceutical opportunity.
This “Policy to Catalyze R&D and Innovation in the Pharma- MedTech Sector
in India” is a commitment to encourage Research & Development (R&D) in
pharmaceuticals and medical devices and to create an ecosystem for innovation
in the sector in order for India to become a leader in drug discovery and
innovative medical devices through incubating an entrepreneurial
environment. It acknowledges the need for greater emphasis on encouraging
R&D, through indigenously developed cutting-edge products and technologies
across the value chain.
Recognizing that R&D is integral to enhance the benefits of the Pharma –
Medtech sectors towards meeting the health care needs of the country, a
comprehensive national policy framework is proposed to build a robust
ecosystem to ensure the holistic development of R&D and Innovation. The
sector objectives in turn, can contribute to achieving SDG 03 namely “Ensure
healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages” and specifically the Target
3.8. “Achieve universal health coverage, including financial risk protection, access to
quality essential health-care services and access to safe, effective, quality and affordable
essential medicines and vaccines for all”. The policy is built upon three focus areas,
namely, strengthening the regulatory framework, incentivizing investments
and creating a facilitatory ecosystem for Innovation.
2. Background to the Policy
1

2.1 India is well recognized as the pharmacy of the world. The
pharmaceutical industry has played a key role in driving better health
outcomes across the world by being a large and reliable supplier of affordable
and high-quality generics drugs. Increased accessibility to affordable drugs in
India has helped reduce disease burden in the country by 36 percent between
1990 and 2016 and has also brought down treatment cost for several life-
threatening diseases to <5% of its original cost. India has also helped improve
access globally by supplying ~60% of global vaccine supply, 20-22% of generic
exports, enabling access to AIDS treatment to 37% of patients in Africa in 2009
compared to just 2% in 2003 and by being the 2nd largest exporter of Ayurveda
and alternative medicine in the world. The industry has also contributed
significantly to India's economy by providing employment to 2.7 Mn people,
generating USD 13 Bn in trade surplus every year, and USD 2 Bn in FDI inflows
to pharmaceutical industry in the period 2015 to 2018. The focus on high quality
is borne out by the presence of largest number of USFDA accredited
manufacturing plants outside of the US. Indian pharmaceutical industry’s
contribution has become even more prominent in 2020 as India has supported
the global battle against COVID-19 pandemic by maintaining drug supplies to
about 200 countries even during the darkest days of the pandemic.
2.2. Over the years, Biopharmaceuticals is becoming a key driver for growth in
global Pharmaceuticals, with increasing emergence of biologics and
biosimilars. The global biosimilar market opportunity is expected to grow to
USD 70 bn by 20271 . In India the biopharmaceuticals sector is reported to have
delivered a 5 year CAGR of 50% and likely to grow strongly. There are about
100 biosimilar approved in the Indian market till October 2020 and Industry
reports another 40+ biosimilars in the clinical development stage. In the
response to the pandemic, Indian industry has come forward to develop and
manufacture bio-specific antibodies with some companies developing expertise
in Antibody Drug Conjugate (ADC) and Monoclonal antibodies (MAB). The
Vaccine sector in India with proven capacity for manufacturing at scale,
(catering to 62% of global vaccine demand) is also benefitted by talented
vaccine developers that have been at the forefront of the fight against COVID
19. Innovation and R&D will be key to retaining global leadership in vaccine
sector and growing the biopharmaceuticals segment.
1 Source: Association of Biotechnology led enterprises (ABLE)
2

2.3. The medical devices sector, is a sunrise segment in Indian
manufacturing sector, with over 750-800 domestic medical devices
manufacturers having an average investment of $2.3–2.7 Mn and turnover of
$6.2-6.9 Mn. The sector itself is highly diversified as it covers a range of
products from reagents to radiotherapy equipment. The Indian medical device
Industry is heterogeneous, consisting of large multinationals as well as small
and medium enterprises (SMEs) and is growing at an unprecedented scale.
Around 65% of the medical device manufacturers in India are domestic players
operating in the consumables segment and catering to local consumption with
limited exports. In addition, there are notable private sector firms
manufacturing stents, dialyzers, x ray machines etc. While currently there is a
high degree of import dependence for high end equipment, yet, the Indian
medical devices sector is playing a key role in driving better health outcomes
by providing innovative and affordable products and solutions at scale. During
the recent pandemic period, the industry demonstrated capacity for scale,
innovation and cost efficiency in manufacture of ventilators, diagnostic kits,
followed by pulse oximeters, oxygen concentrators and similar equipment. The
well-developed IT ecosystem in India affords added advantage to
diversification in the medical devices space.
2.4. Despite these strong fundamentals, there are areas of concern that need to
be addressed for the sustained growth of the Pharma-Medtech sector with
attendant benefits to Health care systems. On the Pharmaceuticals side, the
strong presence in generics market is vulnerable to the high degree of import
dependence in APIs and KSMs. The relatively low pace of development of
Biologics and Biosimilars and other products that capture emerging trends in
new generation therapeutics is also cause for concern. In the Medtech space, the
low domestic manufacturing capabilities in High end scanning and imaging
equipment needs to be addressed.
2.5. While giving a clarion call for ‘Atmanirbhar Bharat’, the Hon’ble Prime
Minister highlighted that India can only achieve self-reliance in
pharmaceuticals and medical devices by strengthening its R&D infrastructure
that would drive expansion of access to life-saving medicines and help India
become a global pharmaceuticals and medical devices exports hub. Also, the
Parliamentary Standing Committee in its 46th Report on ‘Promotion and
coordination of basic, applied and other research in areas related to
the Pharmaceutical Sector’ in July, 2018 recommended for institutionalizing
3

inter-departmental coordination mechanism, enhancing academia-industry
linkage, boosting infrastructure, enhancing budget allocation for
Pharmaceuticals and medical devices Research & Development, concentrating
on future areas of research, like biologics and re-adjusting policy, rules &
regulations. In pursuance to the recommendations of the Committee, an Inter-
Departmental Committee (IDC) was set up by the Department of
Pharmaceuticals in January, 2019 to institutionalize a robust mechanism to
ensure efficiency, effectiveness and transparency and coordinate research in a
collaborative, synchronized and synergized way for optimum utilization of
funds and to ensure no overlapping and duplication of efforts and resources.
2.6. More recently, the challenges faced in India and indeed globally during the
pandemic years of 2020 and 2021 have generated insights that growth must also
serve the aims to assure drug security, diversify supply chains, increase access
and develop innovative solutions to meet health care needs at scale. Whereas
other support, in the form of regulation for safety and quality, financing,
manufacturing infrastructure, skilled manpower, and cross border cooperation
will no doubt be necessary for achieving these multiple objectives, Innovation
and Research will be important contributors for sustaining them.
3. Opportunities and Objectives
3.1. The COVID 19 pandemic has brought to the forefront the role of innovation
in expanding scale, access and affordability of healthcare products. The role of
innovations in providing vaccines, and medical equipment at scale and of
quality that can work in countries at different stages of development has been
critical to management of the pandemic. The benefits of repurposing of drugs
and the proliferation in monoclonal antibodies have also highlighted the role of
innovation in tackling global emergencies.
3.2. At a global level, Pharma and Medtech innovators are moving towards
application of telemedicine, Artificial Intelligence (AI) & Machine Learning
(ML), Virtual Reality (VR), Internet of Medical Things (IoMTs),
Nanotechnology, Robotics & 3D printing, Big data & advanced analytics for
aided diagnosis, green technology, additive manufacturing, flexible
production, mobile applications for chronic disease management, digital
therapeutics, precision medicine, and Medical records etc.
3.3. Several enablers including a strong local industry, export experience, and
depth of technical capabilities can help Pharma and Medtech sectors work
4

towards the vision of “Discover in India” and build a strong ecosystem for
healthcare innovation. Achieving this vision will not only help India maintain
its global relevance but also drive several health and economic benefits for the
country. India although well placed in generics and certain medical devices, is
yet to demonstrate sustained higher capabilities relating to drug discovery in
pharmaceuticals, new products in biopharma and high-end medical devices.
Building this presence can generate substantial health benefit for India by
enabling development of drugs for India-specific ailments, which do not get
adequate attention globally (e.g., drug-resistant infections like NDM-1; oral
cavity cancer, where India accounts for ~30% of diseases burden). It will also
enhance industry’s contribution to India’s economy (additional USD 10-12 Bn
in exports every year) and create large pool of white-collar jobs to enhance
India’s differentiation vis a vis other developing economies.
3.4. The increased spending on healthcare globally, the increase in the size of
the Indian middle class, the commitment to Universal Health and the attention
to schemes such as PM AY, Ayushman Bharat etc. have created a sustained
demand trajectory for Pharma Medtech sectors. The demand for better
therapeutic outcomes, the trends in in-home treatment, personalized
diagnostics and wearables, telemedicine etc have created scope for
differentiated product and service offerings. To capture these opportunities,
the Pharma-Medtech sectors would have to move out of comfort zones and
adopt innovation as a driving feature of their business strategies.
3.5. Objectives of the Policy: This policy aims to enable a conducive regulatory
landscape to accelerate research & development and drive targeted funding,
build strong industry-academia collaboration in line with the global best
practices and create best-in-class infrastructure for Innovation in Pharma-
Medtech sectors. The specific objectives of the Policy are listed below:
3.5.1 To simplify regulatory processes to enable rapid drug discovery and
development and innovation in medical devices;
3.5.2 To explore mechanisms to incentivize private sector investment in
research and evaluate various funding mechanisms – Budgetary
support, Venture capital, CSR funding etc. and fiscal incentives to
support innovation;
3.5.3 To identify mechanisms to strengthen the R&D ecosystem through
increased collaboration between Industry and Academia; and
5

3.5.4 To enable integration of the existing policies and programs of various
departments/ agencies/ institutes in order to develop mechanisms to
dovetail research as per requirement of the Industry.
4. Focus Areas
4.1 The Policy postulates three main areas for focus to achieve the above
objectives. The first is to create a regulatory environment that facilitates
innovation and research in product development, expanding the traditional
regulatory objectives of safety and quality. The second focus area would be to
incentivize private and public investment in Innovation through a mix of fiscal
and non-fiscal measures, thereby matching risks with remunerative financing
options. The third area of focus will be to build an enabling ecosystem designed
to support innovation and cross sectoral research as a strong institutional
foundation for sustainable growth in the sector. The following paragraphs
describe how the measures proposed under these three focus areas to meet the
policy objectives, largely based on the recommendations in the Report to
Catalyse R&D and Innovation in Pharma-Medtech.
4.2 Regulatory Framework: Streamlining Processes/Approvals
4.2.1. Regulatory frameworks are currently geared towards assuring safety and
efficacy and do not necessarily differentiate in favour of innovation. The Drug
Controller General of India in the CDSCO is the licensing authority, but there
are multiple agencies with different mandates and expertise that an Innovator
firm has to navigate. In the case of bio-pharmaceuticals, the regulatory scrutiny
of manipulation of the genetic material is an additional procedure. In the case
of medical technology, a number of existing standards and licensing approvals
apply to specific components especially in the electronic and radioactive
spheres. As a result, clear processes to deal with new products and innovations
that fall outside the existing standards may be absent. The Clinical Trial Rules
have been modified in 2020 to deal with some of these issues and the Medical
Devices Rules have been notified by MOHFW to guide the transition to a fully
regulated regime. Another major challenge lies in building regulatory capacity
within government to keep up with the latest advances in science and
technology and reduce dependence on ad-hoc external inputs. All of this
contributes to long timelines for grant of approval to innovative products,
which has been identified as an area of concern.
6

4.2.2. Therefore, the following measures are contemplated to create a regulatory
bias in favour of Innovation and original research:
a. Process optimization: All regulators will be mandated to work together
to reduce process overlapping and establish timelines for requisite
approvals. A Common Specific Procedure Pathway (CSPP) would be
provided for each class of product, which would include checklists,
prescribed timelines, parallel processing, joint inspections, automatic /
deemed approvals, and sharing of data across regulators. It shall be the
aim to bring down the current time taken for regulatory approvals for
innovative products by at least 50% within the next two years.
b. Technology based platform: Creation of a single end to end digital portal
is proposed, which would be used by different departments/ regulators.
The Portal (single window) to be hosted by CDSCO will offer a single
interface between Innovator and Regulator. It will function through an
interconnected system with automated transfer of data across
departments and agencies and enable upload of all documents on the
integrated portal. Artificial intelligence backed dossier review and
deficiency identification using natural language processing (NLP) and
automated document management workflows will be deployed to
enhance efficiency and reduce human interface. The technology based
single point of interaction shall aim to bring transparency, timeliness and
predictability in processes and outcomes around regulation.
c. Regulatory Capacity: The policy proposes to strengthen the existing
institutional capacity of the regulatory bodies (CDSCO) by setting up of
project management roles to provide dedicated support to the industry
Innovators. The strengthening of the regulator’s capabilities would
include building in-house expertise in Biopharmaceuticals and high end
medical devices. Specialisation will have to be created or in-sourced to
handle oversight of regulatory functions in respect of New Biological
Entities and New Chemical Entities, Biologics, Imaging medical
technologies, New Materials, tele-diagnostics, AI/ML based
innovations, Sensors, etc. NPPA will be supported to develop greater
expertise in pricing of new innovative products, while pursuing
affordability as an overall objective. The policy advocates collaboration
with relevant international regulatory agencies to enhance expertise of
Indian regulators for approval of new drugs and medical devices and
7

ensure a globally harmonized regulatory system; existing MoUs
available with CDSCO will be reactivated and expanded for this purpose.
The capacity building of regulators will enable them to introduce
benchmarked best practices, stay ahead of the curve and add value to the
expansion of the Pharma- Medtech sectors through Innovation.
d. Legislation: A review of the multiple legislations impacting research and
development in Pharmaceuticals and medical devices will be undertaken
with a view to remove inconsistencies, and redundancies. An illustration
of measures sought are listed as follows:
o Products that are cultured and cultivated artificially under controlled
conditions are essentially not impacting natural resources and
effectively the biodiversity of the country and hence should be
exempted from the Biological Diversity Act.
o Institutional bodies need to be empowered for approving pre-clinical
protocols, e.g., Institutional Animal Ethics Committee (IAEC) to be on
par with Institutional Bio- Safety Committee (IBSC) to permit
regulatory approvals for pre-clinical activities.
o Enable joint inspection by CDSCO and State FDA (which should be
conducted only once), in parallel, in case of vaccines and biologics for
a particular class of product, for marketing authorization
o Review legislation enabling regulation of all medical devices in a
phased manner with lead time of 12 months to manufacture for each
category of medical device - Class A, B, C & D.
o Create dedicated licensing provisions for Ayurveda, Siddha & Unani
(ASU) drugs. Explore providing Ayurveda WHO licensing authority
to have the power to issue WHO GMP certificate.
o Review DPCO 2013 to enable differential pricing for innovation with
therapeutic benefits.
4.3 Funding of Innovation: Incentivizing investment
TO BE COVERED IN STAKEHOLDERS’ CONSULTATIONS
4.4 Enabling ecosystem for Innovation and Research
8

The industry and individual institutes working on Pharma- MedTech research
are largely working in silos or through informal ad-hoc cooperation and
therefore need to be supported with a wider ecosystem that systematically
recognizes, facilitates and rewards Innovation and research. Countries that
have created such ecosystem are reaping the market benefits and financial
rewards of innovation. Building Institutional ecosystem also creates a balance
of equity with efficiency motivations that will align the market and societal
forces towards the Goal of Universal Health care. The policy therefore proposes
to address three components of building a robust enabling ecosystem
including:
• Strengthening academic industry linkages
• Collaborating across institutions and sectors
• Building supporting infrastructure
4.4.1. Industry-academia linkages: Strengthen academic talent and
infrastructure
The academic infrastructure will be strengthened and integrated into a coherent
framework for building skilled manpower for the Pharma and Medtech sectors.
Currently Pharmaceutical education is governed by Pharmacy Council of India.
In addition, NIPERs work as Institutes of national excellence for post graduate
and doctoral study. The multidisciplinary nature of the medical devices sector
covering material science, electronics, sensors, biochemistry etc. requires the
sector to draw upon talent from a wide range of academic institutions including
the Indian Institutes of technology. Considerable effort is also warranted to
modernize curriculum in pharmaceutical education to prepare manpower to
navigate if not lead the technology changes in research and manufacturing. The
following measures are proposed to be taken up in this respect:
• Strengthening academic curriculum to make it dynamic and
contemporary to meet current needs of pharmaceutical and Medtech
sector, with increased focus on future ready technologies (e.g. Biologics,
continuous flow technology, use of AI and automation in
manufacturing.)
• Institutionalize Industry representation in NIPERs and provide channels
for varying degree of financial and managerial involvement
9

• Integrate pharmaceutical education at graduate, post graduate and
doctoral levels under NIPERs and enhance expertise in
Biopharmaceutical education
• Attract global educational institutions of eminence to create centres in
India, leveraging the provision in the National Education Policy (NEP)
allowing foreign universities to open campuses in India
• Purposeful investment in few priority institutes to build ‘Centres of
excellence’ focused on med-tech innovation and R&D in the country
• Programs to attract global talent and incentivize local talent in research
areas through recognition (President’s Award and equivalent), monetary
awards, fellowships & grants, etc.
• Encouraging industry to fund research in academic institutions;
Provision for companies to setup “research fund” for supporting
research programs at academic institutions and laboratories with tax
incentives
• Setup of entrepreneurship incubation centres in academic institutions
with institutional linkage with Pharma and Med tech industry
• Design a Bayh Dole like policy to encourage academicians to setup
independent companies (spin offs) to move academic discoveries into the
commercial landscape, and ensure fair reward sharing between
innovators, institutes and industry.
• Setup a strong governance framework to build trust and accountability;
To ensure accountability, setup a strong program management to
monitor and report progress, robust performance framework with
upfront alignment of objectives and funding linked to outcomes
4.4.2. Collaborating across institutions and sectors
While a great deal of the R&D and Innovation that leads to launch of innovative
medical products takes place in the Industry, a number of Research centres are
also operating in the Government sector on various aspects of Pharmaceuticals
and Medical technology and associated fields (an illustrative list is annexed).
Apart from the NIPERs, the rest of them fall within the Council for Scientific
and Industrial Research, Department of Biotechnology, Department of Health
Research and Department of Higher education. There is scope to increase
10

collaboration across institutions so as to encourage innovation at scale and
integrate research work across sectors and institutions. Collaboration is also
required across the entire product development cycle covering drug discovery,
drug delivery, device design, clinical trials, therapeutic and incremental
innovations etc. The multiplicity of institutions and programmes supporting
research and innovation in the pharma- Medtech space makes articulation as
well as the implementation of research on priority areas challenging. There is
also a need to align current pharmaceutical R&D focus in line with the disease
burden of the country and meet evolving priorities such as drug security,
resilience in value chains and building domestic capacities.
The following steps are proposed to be taken to integrate the existing policies
and programs of various departments in order to develop mechanisms to
dovetail research as per dynamic requirements in healthcare:
• Identification of Partner Institutions / organizations that would adopt
the policy through a formal mechanism; these Partner institutions may
include Research Institutions under various Government departments,
CoEs set up under various Programs, and Private Research Labs.
Institutions operating in a wide range of subjects of research would be
eligible including electronics, instrumentation, Sensors and IoT, Material
Science, AI/ML, Pharmacology, Biotechnology, Human Genetics etc.
• Setting up of an Inter-Departmental Research Council on Pharma and
MedTech to catalyze, facilitate and promote collaboration across
industry, academia and research institutions across Departments for
domestic and international collaboration in R&D in Pharma Medtech
sectors.
• The Council will have an agile and slim structure with a focus on
prioritizing areas for research based on national healthcare priorities,
building synergies and promoting the sharing of information among
these research bodies, with following functions:
o Resource Optimization by creating a strong project management
structure, with representation from government, industry,
academia to (i) focus on industry relevant research areas, (ii)
decide priority areas for funding and incentives, and (iii)
continuously monitor the program and project implementation.
11

o Create Provision for a Corpus fund for the council to be funded
jointly by government and industry which can leverage existing
sources such as NRF
o Creation of Observatory for R&D prioritization in both
communicable and non-communicable diseases areas through
evaluation of disease burden and identification of knowledge gaps
in disease areas; Observatory to work with regulatory agencies and
keep them updated on new developments across disease areas
o Leading the Drug Discovery Mission as a multi-institutional
initiative by pooling the strengths and talents of research
institutions under DoP, DHR, DBT and CSIR.
o Supporting the Common Research Program of NIPERs and
establishment of Centres of Excellence in selected disease areas.
• Building an ecosystem model to strengthen R&D establishments, that
acts as a unique platform for innovation, integrates diverse skill sets, and
brings together stakeholders of pharmaceuticals/ bio-pharmaceutical /
biomedical innovation landscape, while ensuring synergy between
stakeholders across the product innovation pipeline.
• Taking forward the compelling lesson learnt from Covid-19 to showcase
India’s strength and prowess in recent times, the policy will promote the
concept of “Innovate in India”. To achieve this and to promote India as
an “innovation hub”, the following interventions will be undertaken to
build a strong brand along with effective dissemination of the same
among target investors looking at making R&D investments in India in
this Pharma-Medtech sector:
o Setting up innovation forums and awards to enable investors to
have visibility and actively interact with the domestic innovation
community
o Encourage the participation of Indian innovation leaders in Global
Forums to help Indian innovators to gain insights on global market
access and showcase our country’s strength on global platforms
o Creating a compelling “Discover in India” vision and actively
disseminate messages across community, by highlighting the
initiatives and incentives offered by the Government of India.
12

4.4.3. Infrastructure: Creation of dedicated ‘Innovation Hub’
While research institutions in the Government sector have an important role in
promoting basic and applied research, much of the innovation that leads
directly to patient benefits takes place through private entrepreneurs and
innovator firms. Under the Atal Innovation Mission, Government is setting up
Atal Incubation Centres (AICs), in public and private sector as well as scaling
up Established Incubation Centres (EICs). A number of Startup Incubators are
already functioning in life sciences, biotech, medical devices and MedTech
space under Start up India. However, the current infrastructure is limited and
concentrated in a few nascent innovation hubs in the country, emphasizing the
need for more high-quality infrastructure. The following steps will be taken for
strengthening the infrastructure for innovation in Pharma MedTech Sectors in
India:
• Identification and Scale up of selected existing Innovation hubs to
maturity ensuring co-location of academia, R&D Centers, industry,
startups, incubators; provide "plug and play" infrastructure and ensure
requisite financial and regulatory support
• Establish sub-sector specific new hubs with an anchor investor leading a
consortium / network of academic institutions, universities, start-ups
with industries, business schools, clinical settings, funding agencies
(including VCs) to provide an integrated thrust to research in the country
in 3-5 years' time frame
• Promote establishment of health-tech ecosystem within the innovation
hubs with high end capabilities merging healthcare with the new age
technologies such as artificial intelligence, digital and analytics, bringing
together cross sectoral expertise
• Create a matrix of Therapeutic Segments, including vector borne
diseases, infectious diseases, non-communicable diseases and lifestyle
diseases and develop Centres of Excellence within the Innovation Hubs
focusing on these verticals
• To ensure a faster availability of testing infrastructure, the empanelment
of laboratories will be accelerated for testing medical devices, Biologics,
vaccines, IVDs, diagnostic kits for various functionalities including
reliability, biocompatibility, bioequivalence, transportation, vibration
13

and other relevant conformity requirements. NIPERs will be supported
for increasing testing and certification functions.
• The establishment of IP Innovation and Patent Offices (IPO) or
Technology Transfer offices (TTO) in academic institutions, industries
and incubation centres will be considered in order to support innovators,
entrepreneurs and start-ups with patent related policies and provisions.
Patent offices would be attached to the Office of the Controller General
of Patents, Designs and Trade Marks to bring clarity in patent application
process, joint ventures and foreign collaborations.
5. Implementation Framework
A High-level Task Force will be set up in Department of Pharmaceuticals under
the Minister for Chemicals and Fertilizers to guide and review the
implementation of the Policy. The Task Force will draw upon resource persons
from Departments and Organizations related to the implementation as the
success of the policy requires coordinated action by several agencies. The
Implementation will be designed in the form of an Action Plan defining roles,
responsibilities, activities, targets, and timelines. The Policy has a ten-year
perspective, and the Action Plan will be broken down to five year and annual
activities for ease of implementation including spending decisions. The Action
Plan will list activities in four categories namely Policy decisions, Program
execution, Collaboration and Communications. The Policy Action Plan will
cover a Five-year period with Annual Plans with attendant Financing
framework.
6. Monitoring and Evaluation
6.1 The Policy requires the Action Plan to determine the targets on the
following indicators:
i. Identification of Priority areas and Research problems measured in Share
of Research by Identified Institutions in priority areas
ii. R&D spending by Industry
iii. New Drug Discovery (including Biopharmaceuticals) measured in
number of NCE and NBE in the pipeline and approved.
14

iv. Domestic manufacturing share in identified high end medical equipment
v. Degree of Backward Integration in API, consumables and Components
in domestic startups,
vi. Number of Orphan Drugs introduced in Indian market
vii. Increased availability of quality Research manpower in priority areas
viii. Start Ups in Pharma Medtech space incubated by Partner Institutions
ix. Share of Global exports in non-generics
x. Share of imports in selected product segments of medical devices
6.2 A Monitoring and Evaluation Framework would be designed with the
help of IEO NITI with rational Target setting, resource optimization, portal
based reporting mechanism. Risk to implementation would be defined and risk
management plans would be devised for consideration of the High-Level Task
Force. Industry led Advisory Committee would be set up for continuous
feedback on the implementation and monitoring. Independent evaluation
would be carried out at prescribed periodicity against the defined outcomes.
***
[1] Annexure 4
[2] Section 8 of R&D Global Best Practices Document
[3] Section 9 of R&D Global Best Practices Document
[4] Section 8 of R&D Global Best Practices Document
[5] Section 2 of R&D Global Best Practices Document
15

Annexure 2
List of Central Institutes conducting research in Health Sciences
CSIR INSTITUTES
1. Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology (www.ccmb.res.in)
2. Central Drug Research Institute (www.cdriindia.org)
3. Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology (www.igib.res.in)
4. CSIR-Institute of Himalayan Bioresource Technology
(https://www.ihbt.res.in/en/)
5. CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Biology (http://www.iicb.res.in)
6. Indian Institute of Chemical Technology (www.iictindia.org)
7. Indian Institute of Integrative Medicine (www.iiim.res.in)
8. Indian Institute of Toxicology Research (www.iitrindia.org)
9. CSIR-Institute of Microbial Technology (https://www.imtech.res.in/)
10. National Chemical Laboratory (www.ncl.india.org)
DBT INSTITUTES
1. National Institute of Immunology (http://www.nii.res.in/)
2. National Centre for Cell Science (https://www.nccs.res.in/)
3. National Brain Research Centre (http://www.nbrc.ac.in/newweb/)
4. Institute of Life Sciences (https://www.ils.res.in/)
16

5. Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology (https://www.rgcb.res.in/)
6. Institute for Stem Cell Science and Regenerative Medicine
(https://www.instem.res.in/)
7. Translational Health Science and Technology Institute
(https://thsti.res.in/newthsti/)
8. National Institute of Biomedical Genomics (https://www.nibmg.ac.in/)
9. Regional Centre for Biotechnology (https://www.rcb.res.in/)
10. National Institute of Animal Biotechnology (http://niab.org.in/)
ICMR INSTITUTES
1. National JALMA Institute for Leprosy & Other Mycobacterial Diseases
(https://www.jalma-icmr.org.in/)
2. National Institute of Cancer Prevention and Research
(https://nicpr.icmr.org.in/)
3. National Institute of Occupational Health (http://nioh.org/)
4. National Centre for Disease Informatics and Research
(https://ncdirindia.org/)
5. Bhopal Memorial Hospital & Research Centre (http://bmhrc.ac.in/)
6. National Institute for Research in Environmental Health
(https://nireh.icmr.org.in/)
7. National Institute for Research in Tuberculosis (http://www.nirt.res.in/)
8. National Institute of Malaria Research (https://nimr.org.in/)
17

9. National Institute of Pathology (http://instpath.gov.in/)
10. National Institute of Medical Statistics (http://icmr-nims.nic.in/)
11. National Institute of Nutrition (https://www.nin.res.in/index.html)
12. National Institute of Cholera and Enteric Diseases
(http://www.niced.org.in/)
13. National Institute for Research in Reproductive Health
(http://nirrh.res.in/)
14. National Institute of Immunohematology (https://www.niih.org.in/)
15. National Institute of Virology (https://www.niv.co.in/)
16. National AIDS Research Institute (https://nari-icmr.res.in/)
17. Rajendra Memorial Research Institute of Medical Sciences
(http://www.rmrims.org.in/)
DRDO INSTITUTES
1. Defence Bio-engineering & Electro-medical Laboratory
(https://www.drdo.gov.in/labs-and-establishments/defence-bio-
engineering-electro-medical-laboratory-debel)
2. Defence Institute of Bio-Energy Research
(https://www.drdo.gov.in/labs-and-establishments/defence-institute-
bio-energy-research-diber)
3. Defence Institute of High-Altitude Research
(https://www.drdo.gov.in/labs-and-establishments/defence-institute-
high-altitude-research-dihar)
18

4. Defence Institute of Physiology & Allied Sciences
(https://www.drdo.gov.in/labs-and-establishments/defence-institute-
physiology-allied-sciences-dipas)
5. Defence Institute of Psychological Research
(https://www.drdo.gov.in/labs-and-establishments/defence-institute-
psychological-research-dipr)
6. Institute of Nuclear Medicine and Allied Sciences
(https://www.drdo.gov.in/labs-and-establishments/institute-nuclear-
medicine-allied-sciences-inmas)
DOP INSTITUTES
1. National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research, Mohali
(http://www.niper.gov.in)
2. National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research, Hajipur
(https://www.niperhajipur.ac.in)
3. National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research, Kolkata
(http://www.niperkolkata.edu.in)
4. National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research, Hyderabad
(http://www.niperhyd.ac.in)
5. National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research, Guwahati
(https://niperguwahati.ac.in)
6. National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research,
Ahmedabad (https://www.niperahm.ac.in)
7. National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research, Raebareli
(http://niperraebareli.edu.in)
19