Government of India
Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change
Wildlife Division
6th Floor, Vayu Wing
Indira Paryavaran Bhawan,
Jor Bag Road, Aliganj,
New Delhi-110003
F. No. 1-57/2014 WL
Dated: f qeptember 2018
1. The Pr. Chief Conservator of Forests & HoFF
All States/UT Governments
2. The Chief Wildlife Warden
All States/UT Governments
Sub: Policy for Eco-tourism in Forest and Wildlife Areas- Reg.
Sir,
Forests and wildlife are inseparable elements of environmental integrity and
therefore, a participatory approach towards building the intricate interface between
humans and forests is imperative.
2.(cid:9) With a view to practice eco-tourism in a ecofriendly manner, a policy has been
prepared by this Ministry. The Eco-Tourism Policy is primarily prepared for wildlife,
forest and areas having significant aesthetic appeal for nature. A copy of the
document is enclosed.
3. The State/UT Governments may take further necessary action, in this regard.
Yours faithfully,
(Dr. R. C opinath)
Joint Director (WL)
Telefax: 011-24695379
E.mail:
Encl: As above.
Copy to:
1. Principal Secretary (Forests), all States/UT Governments.
2. The Joint Secretary, Niche Tourism, Ministry of Tourism, Parivahan Bhawan,
New Delhi.

POLICY
FOR
EGO-TOURISM IN FOREST AND
WILDLIFE AREAS
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT FOREST AND
CLIMATE CHANGE

MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT, FOREST AND CLIMATE CHANGE
POLICY FOR ECO-TOURISM IN FOREST AND WILDLIFE AREAS
I. BACKGROUND
Eco-tourism may be defined as 'responsible travel to natural areas that conserves
the environment and improves the well-being of local people' (TIES). Forests and
wildlife are elements of nature and inseparable parts of the environment. Because of the
intricate nature of interface between nature and human beings, nature conservation must
entail participation of' people as a non negotiable component. The participation in this
endeavour includes not only the forest fringe dwellers, but also those who may be living
away from the forests. Eco-tourism may be developed in wildlife conservation areas
designated as Protected Areas (PAs) — Wildlife Sanctuaries, National Parks, Conservation
Reserves and Community Reserves., and also in areas outside designated protected Areas,
which may include, forests, mangroves, Sacred Groves, mud flats, wetlands, rivers, etc.
Appreciation of the various elements of nature, their direct and indirect impact on our
survival and intangible services provided by those are of paramount. Visitation to such
pristine Areas would facilitate direct appreciation and understanding of the nature. Eco-
tourism, when practiced appropriately, besides educating the visitors can also provide
livelihood opportunities for the local communities. Hence, there is felt need to develop a
model of eco-tourism that is responsible and compatible with sensitivities of the
management objectives of the landscapes.(cid:9) However, the objective primarily being for
preservation, it is of prime importance that the profile of the natural features are not
compromised due to the impact of eco-tourism activities.
2. GOAL
Promoting better understanding of' nature and wildlife conservation while generating
income and opportunities for the local communities.
2

I OBJECTIVES
The following are the broad objectives of the Eco-tourism policy:
i. Adopting low impact nature tourism which ensures ecological integrity
ii. Promoting biodiversity richness and heritage values of India's wilderness
iii. Engaging local communities and developing mechanisms with a view of enriching
the local economy and promoting sustainable use of indigenous materials
iv. Establishing partnerships with all stakeholders for developing and promoting nature
tourism.
4. GUIDING PRINCIPLES FOR ECOTOURISM
(i) Eco-tourism Plan: Eco-tourism facilitation within the fbrest and wildlife areas will be a
part of the management/ working plan of the unit. The eco-tourism plan will provide for
identified locations/ routes for visitation, permissible activities, permissible time for visit
and means of travel. Delineation of inviolate space in the area and seasonal requirements
will be specified in the Plan. States may develop benchmarks/ standardized criteria based
on site specificity, for adoption of best practices in eco-tourism.
(ii) Eco-tourism zone: Demarcation of areas for tourist visitation, whether within core or
buffer or both will depend upon the management requirements and shall be decided based
on the target species, their behavioural and habitat characteristics. To maintain ecological
integrity, protection of breeding areas and other sensitive sites are necessary. Therefore,
those should be excluded from eco-tourism activities. Finalisation of tourism packages,
identification of tourism routes, etc. will be done by the respective Protected Area Manager/
DFO in consultation with the State Chief Wildlife Warden.
(iii) Community Participation: It is essential that management of eco-tourism facilitates
primarily vests on the local communities as the principal stakeholders. Thus, the benefits
flowing from the visitation in the area must. also accrue to the local communities by way of
livelihood opportunities arising from eco-tourism. This will reinforce their interface and
sense of ownership.
3

Buffer areas, private lands, revenue lands and Reserve Forests around PAs that have
good wildlife habitat will be developed for eco-tourism to reduce pressure on sensitive
"core" areas and to enhance local benefits.
(iv) Infrastructure development:
Natural profile and ecological integrity of forest and wildlife areas, along with their
wildlife/ biodiversity values shall be maintained. Infrastructure for eco-tourism will be so
designed that those merge with the ambient environment. These will utilise local resources
and avoid use of cement concrete as far as possible.
The activities will be eco-friendly and no permanent structures will be established in
violation of Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980.
Considering that the local livelihood improvement is one of the expected outcomes
of eco-tourism. homestead based hospitality enterprises will be encouraged.
Construction works like permanent buildings for camps, camping complexes with
lodging/ boarding structures, helipads, new roads, tourist bungalows/ commercial lodges etc
for eco-tourism purpose shall not be allowed without clearance under Forest (Conservation)
Act.
Infrastructure outside Protected Areas will also be developed in eco-friendly manner
so that those merge with the surroundings. The extent of infrastructure those will be
developed will be limited to the carrying capacity of the area.
4

S,(cid:9) IMPLEMENTATION STRATEGY
The following are the broad framework for implementation of the [co-tourism policy:
Strategy i: Identification of potential sites: Each State may identify areas for eco-tourism
within the Protected Areas, in pristine areas rich in biodiversity or of aesthetic significance
through a participatory 'Process involving stakeholders, particularly the local communities.
Strategy ii: Assessment of Carrying Capacity: Carrying capacities of visitors and
vehicles those may be allowed to enter inside the identified area will be assessed and ceiling
on number of visitors/vehicles those may allowed to enter the area at any given time, will be
fixed. Carrying capacity assessment will cover:
• Number of Persons visiting the PA at different points of time
• Number of Vehicles/boats, etc. entering the PA
• Infrastructure
• Duration of the visits
• Duration of exposure of the PA to [co-tourism activities
An illustrative calculation of carrying capacity, as worked out in the 'Guidelines for
tourism in Tiger Reserves' is at ANNEXURE.
Strategy iii: Capacity building: Field functionaries will be imparted specialized training
on Eco-tourism activities. capacities of local communities will be built to act as nature
guides and to provide hospitality management services. This may include training to
discharge specialized tasks such as tourist guides, natural science interpreters, patrol
partners for protection work, entrepreneurs for small scale homestead based hospitality
industry, small business operators (like souvenir shops, equipments for hire, photography
etc).
The State Governments may charge a conservation fee for overall eco-development.
The conservation fee may be decided based on the number of persons visiting the facility,
the duration of operation of the facility (seasonal or year round) and on a luxury
classification system such as home stay to high-end. The rate of conservation fee and tourist
facility strata will be determined by the State Government and the funds, so collected will be
5

earmarked to address local livelihood development issues, human wildlife conflict
management and conservation through eco-development.
Strategy iv: Sharing of Revenue benefits: Considering that eco-tourism is an economic
activity. it is important that the eco-tourism plan incorporates a feasible revenue sharing
mechanism for the stakeholders.
Provision will be made for establishment of foundations, either for each of the
identified area or an umbrella Foundation to cover multiple areas. The funds accrued from
eco-tourism activities in the Foundations will be utilised for community development, and
running of eco-tourism facilities.
An indicative model for sharing of revenue is as under:
• 40% for payment of remuneration to local community directly involved in running
eco-tourism facilities;
• 40% for maintenance of the Eco-tourism facilities
• 10% as incentive to local Eco Development Committee (EDC) or Village Level
Forest Management Committee
• 10% as revenue to Government
Strategy v: Monitoring: Eco-tourism plans will invariably include a dynamic monitoring
mechanism, covering number of tourists visiting and the pattern, their level of satisfaction,
involvement of local people, scope for improvement, etc. This will facilitate prediction of
growth and preparation for management of the growth of eco-tourism in terms of visitation
management, growth of hospitality facilities in neighbourhood, need for security
arrangements for the area and so on.
Strategy vi: Education and interpretation: For effective use of the eco-tourism
potential of the area, the management has to work on an effective education and
interpretation plan. The visitors must be sensitized on the significance of conservation and
expected behavioural requirements while they are within the pristine area. For this purpose
an effective communication plan is essential which must include providing crucial
information to the tourists to appreciate the eco-system services and intangible benefits
6

provided by the area. It will be a good idea to put in place electronic visual tools, well
equipped interpretation centre, appropriate signages, audiovisual presentation centers,
interactive learning tools, safety protocol and information material on the area for the
visitors.
Strategy vii: Interface with District/ State Administration:
Within National Parks, Sanctuaries and Reserved or Protected Forests: Collaboration
and coordination amongst the Central and State Government Departments, EDCs, forest
dwellers, local communities and civil society institutions will bring about synergy for
effective eco-tourism management. States/ District/ Protected Area Steering Committees
may be set up.
A local level committee may look like:
Park Manager/ the Divisional Forest Officer- Chair
Honorary Wildlife Warden- Member
Representative of Tourism Department-Member
Representative of Local Panchayat- Member
Representative of Local Communities- Member
Wildlife Experts- Member
Forest Range Officer- Member Secretary.
Mandate:
• To oversee implementation of the eco-tourism strategies and guidelines with
respect to the concerned area and make recommendations to the Eco-tourism Board
and State/UT Government, wherever necessary;
• To advise local communities on issues relating to development of eco-tourism in
areas outside Protected Areas
• To monitor the activities of tour operators and ensure that they follow all safety
norms, rules and procedures and do not cause any damage or disturbance to the
eco-tourism resources and activities;
• To ensure that the revenue from eco-tourism flow to the local communities.
7

The State Board for Wildlife may take review of the Tourism activities in the State
and make suggestions appropriately.
In case of Conservation Reserves and Community Reserves, the Management
Committees constituted under Section 36B and 36D of the Wild Life (Protection) Act,
1972 will advise on activities including tourism in Conservation and Community Reserves
and will be in consonance with this policy for eco-tourism in Protected Areas.
The State Board for Wildlife would take review of the Tourism activities in the
State and make suggestions appropriately.
There are many Protected Areas with shrines or religious places located within. The
tour operators, drivers and shrine controlling authorities need to be given an exposure on
the value of forest ecosystems and their ecological services, along with the training to
inculcate do's and don'ts during visits of pilgrims into forests and PAs. Cooperation of the
local administration will be solicited in line with the mechanisms indicated above.
Strategy viii: Institutional mechanism for implementation: Each State/UT may
establish an Eco-Tourism Development Board to advise the State/UT on the eco-tourism
modalities and for overseeing the implementation of the policy. The Board would ensure
that objectives of this Policy are attained. The State/UT would also ensure adequate
Technical and Financial support to the Board. In case of any dispute, the decision of the
management of Protected Areas shall prevail.
Enabling provisions for management of eco-tourism within protected areas:
The legal provisions available within the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 for
facilitating this include section 29, 30, 33, 33B, 35 (6), 38-0 and 64 which provide powers
to the state governments to frame rules for carrying out provisions of the Act, and to the
Chief Wild Life Wardens to regulate activities within the PAs. The powers for approval of
Management plan of a PA are vested with Chief Wild Life Warden. In case of Conservation
Reserves and Community Reserves, the powers vested in the respective management
committees provide enabling environment for formulation of management plan including
the eco-tourism planning within.
8

ANNEXURE
ESTIMATION OF CARRYING CAPACITY
(Model Calculation, Example: Kanha Tiger Reserve)
(a) Physical Carrying Capacity (PCC): This is the "maximum number of visitors that
can physically fit into a defined space, over a particular time". It is expressed as:
PCC A X V/a X RF
Where, A = available area for public use
V/a = one visitor / M2
Rf = rotation factor (number of visits per day)
In order to measure the PCC to Kanha, the followirw criteria must be taken into account:
Only vehicular movements on forest roads are permitted
The "standing area" is not relevant, but "closeness" between vehicles is important
There is a required distance of at least 500 m (112 km.) between 2 vehicles to avoid
dust (2 vehicles / km.)
At least 3 /2 hours are needed for a single park excursion
The PA is open to tourists for 9 months in a year and 9 hours per day
Linear road lengths within the tourist zone are more relevant than area, and the total
lengths are:
Kanha 107.20 km.
Kisli 72.56 km.
Mukki 103 kin.
Total 282.76 or 283 km.
Due to constant vehicular use, the entire road length of 283 km. is prone to
erosion, out of which(cid:9) around 90 km. is affected more
(cid:9)
Rotation Factor (RO = Opening period
Average time of one visit
Physical Carrying Capacity (PCC) = 283 km. x 2 vehicles / km. x 2.6
= 1471.6 or 1472 visits / day
9

(b) Real Carrying Capacity (RCC): RCC is the maximum permissible number of
visits to a site, once the "reductive factors" (corrective) derived from the particular
characteristics of the site have been applied to the FCC. These "reductive factors"
(corrective) are based on biophysical, environmental, ecological, social and
management variables.
RCC = PCC — Cfi — Cf, Cfn,
Where Cf is a corrective factor expressed as a percentage. Thus, the formula for
calculating RCC is:
RCC = PCC x 100 — Cfi x 100 — Cf, x (cid:9) 100 -
Cfn 100 100
Corrective Factors are "site-specific", and are expressed in percentage as below:
Cf =Mix 100
Mt
Where: Cf = corrective factor
Mi = limiting magnitude of the variable
Mt = total magnitude of the variable
(i) Road erosion: Here the susceptibility of the site is taken into account.
Total road length = 283 km. (Mt)
Medium erosion sink = 50 km. (weighting factor: 2)
High erosion risk = 40 km. (weighting factor: 3)
M1= 50 x 2 + 40 x 3 = 100+ 120 = 220 km.
Mt = 283 km.
Cfe = 220 x 100 = 77.8 or
78% 283
(ii) Disturbance to Wildlife: Here, species that are prone to disturbance owing to
visitation are considered. The Central Indian barasingha, a highly endangered,
endemic species found only in Kanha has a courtship period of about 1 month in
winter, during which it is extremely sensitive to disturbance. Likewise, the peak
courtship activity for spotted deer lasts for two months before the onset of regular
monsoon. As far as tigers are concerned, newborns are seen between March and May
and also during the rains; hence an average value of two months in a year can be
considered as the matter phase.
Corrector Factor (Cf) = limiting months / year x
100 12 months / year
10

Corrective Factor for barasingha
Clwi = 1 x 100 = 11.1%
9
Corrective Factor for spotted deer
Cf w2 = 2 x 100 = 22.2%
9
Corrective Factor for tiger
Cf w2 = 2 x 100 = 22.2%
9
Overall corrective factor for disturbance of wildlife in Kanha National Park = Cf w =
Cfi Cf2 + Cf3
= 11.1 + 22.2 + 22.2 = 55.5 or 55%
(iii)(cid:9) Temporary Closing of Roads: For maintenance or other managerial reasons,
visitation to certain roads may be temporary restricted within the Protected Area.
The Corrective Factor in this regard is calculated as:
Cf, = limiting weeks / year x
100 total weeks / year
In Kanha, an average value of 2 limiting weeks per year may be considered as the
"limiting weeks", and thus the corrective factor works out to:
C: ft = 2 weeks / year x 100 = 5.5% 36
weeks / year
Computation of RCC
RCC = 1472 x 100-78 x 100-55 x 100-5.5 100
100 100
= 1472 (0.22 x 0.45 x 0.95)
= 138.4 or 138 visits / day
11

(c) Effective Permissible Carrying Capacity (ECC): ECC is the maximum number of
visitors that a site can sustain, given the management capacity (MC) available. ECC is
obtained by multiplying the real carrying capacity (RCC) with the management capacity
(MC). MC is defined as the sum of conditions that PA administration requires if it is to carry
out its functions at the optimum level. Limitations in management like lack of staff and
infrastructure limit the RCC.
For Kanha, owing to the paucity of staff the MC is around 30%. Hence, ECC =. 138 x 0.30 =
41.4 or 40 vehicles / day.
Thus, the Effective Permissible Carrying Capacity on any single day is only 40 vehicles.
which should be allowed entry as below:
(Forenoon) = 25 vehicles (inclusive of both entry points)
(Afternoon) = 15 vehicles (inclusive of both entry points)
During peak season (winter months), the staff strength may be increased (only 10%) by
deploying "special duty" personnel; this would enhance the ECC to 55 vehicles per day.
Further, increase in the number of vehicles would lead to deleterious effects on the habitat.
* * *
12