Draft STIP Doc 1.4
Science, Technology, and
Innovation Policy
Government of India
Ministry of Science & Technology
Department of Science & Technology
December, 2020

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
Science, Technology, and Innovation Policy (STIP)
Table of Contents
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 2
I. Building a robust Science, Technology and Innovation Ecosystem for an Atmanirbhar
Bharat 7
II. Evolution of STI Policies in India 9
III. Chapters 11
Chapter 1: Open Science 11
Chapter 2: Capacity Development 14
Chapter 3: Financing STI 19
Chapter 4: Research 24
Chapter 5: Innovation and Entrepreneurship 27
Chapter 6: Technology Development and Indigenisation 33
Chapter 7: Equity and Inclusion 39
Chapter 8: Science Communication and Public Engagement 43
Chapter 9: International STI Engagement 47
Chapter 10: STI Governance 52
Chapter 11: STI Policy Governance 57
IV. Implementation Framework 61
V. Monitoring, Evaluation and Feedback Framework 61
VI. Vision 61
1

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
Science, Technology, Innovation Policy (STIP)
Executive Summary
Science, Technology and Innovation (STI) are the key drivers for economic growth and
human development. For India to march ahead on a sustainable development pathway to
include economic development, social inclusion and environmental sustainability for
achieving an “Atmanirbhar Bharat'', a greater emphasis will be given on promoting traditional
knowledge system, developing indigenous technologies and encouraging grass root
innovation.. The emergence of disruptive and impactful technologies poses new challenges
and simultaneously greater opportunities. The COVID-19 pandemic provided a compelling
opportunity for Research and Development (R&D) institutions, academia and industry to
work in unison for sharing of purpose, synergy, collaboration and cooperation.
The new Science, Technology, Innovation Policy aims to bring about profound changes
through short-term, medium-term, and long-term mission mode projects by building a
nurtured ecosystem that promotes research and innovation on the part of both individuals and
organizations. It aims to foster, develop, and nurture a robust system for evidence and
stakeholder-driven STI planning, information, evaluation, and policy research in India. The
policy will identify and address strengths and weaknesses of the Indian STI ecosystem to
catalyse socio-economic development of the country and also make the Indian STI ecosystem
globally competitive.
A broad summary of Science, Technology and Innovation Policy (STIP) is given as under-
1. STIP will lead to the establishment of a National STI Observatory that will act as a
central repository for all kinds of data related to and generated from the STI
ecosystem. It will encompass an open centralised database platform for all financial
schemes, programmes, grants and incentives existing in the ecosystem. The
Observatory will be centrally coordinated and organized in distributed, networked and
interoperable manner among relevant stakeholders.
2. A future-looking, all-encompassing Open Science Framework will be built to provide
access to scientific data, information, knowledge, and resources to everyone in the
country and all who are engaging with the Indian STI ecosystem on an equal
partnership basis. All data used in and generated from publicly-funded research will
be available to everyone under FAIR (findable, accessible, interoperable and reusable)
terms. A dedicated portal to provide access to the outputs of such publicly-funded
research will be created through Indian Science and Technology Archive of Research
(INDSTA). Additionally, full text of final accepted author versions of manuscripts
(postprints and optionally preprints) supported through public funding will be
deposited to an institutional or central repository. The policy will create pathways for
2

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
the Government to negotiate with journal publishers for a “one nation, one
subscription” policy whereby, in return for one centrally-negotiated payment, all
individuals in India will have access to journal articles.
3. Strategies to improve STI education making it inclusive at all levels and more
connected with the economy and society will be developed through processes of skill
building, training and infrastructure development. Engaged Universities will be
created to promote interdisciplinary research to address community needs. Higher
Education Research Centres (HERC) and Collaborative Research Centres (CRC) will
be established to provide research inputs to policymakers and bring together
stakeholders. Online learning platforms will be developed using Information and
Communication Technology (ICT) to address the issue of accessibility and to promote
research and innovation at all levels. Teaching-learning centres (TLCs) will be
established to upskill faculty members which in turn will improve the quality of
education.
4. With an aim to expand the financial landscape of the STI ecosystem, each department/
ministry in the central, the state and the local governments, public sector enterprises,
private sector companies and startups will set up an STI unit with a minimum
earmarked budget to pursue STI activities. Extramural funding will be diversified and
enhanced to double the share of extramural R&D support of the Central government
agencies in the Gross Domestic Expenditure on R&D (GERD) in the next five years.
Each State will earmark a percentage of the state allocation for STI-related activities
under a separate budget head. Foreign Multi National Companies (MNCs) will
collaborate with domestic private and public sector entities on projects aligned to
national needs and priorities. STI investments will be increased through boosting
fiscal incentives, enhancing support to industry, especially Medium Small Micro
Enterprises (MSMEs), for pursuing research through innovation support schemes and
other relevant means on a need basis. Hybrid funding models with enhanced
participation from public and private sectors will be created through the Advanced
Missions in Innovative Research Ecosystem (ADMIRE) initiative. To ensure
systematic governance of the expanded STI financing landscape, an STI Development
Bank will be set up to facilitate a corpus fund for investing in direct long term
investments in select strategic areas on various long and medium-term projects,
commercial ventures, start-ups, technology diffusion and licensing etc. General
Financial Rules (GFR) will be suitably amended for large scale mission mode
programmes and projects of national importance and to facilitate ease of doing
research. Efficient disbursement, communication, monitoring and evaluation
mechanisms (time-bound peer reviews along with technical and transactional audits)
will be set up to support conducive investment.
5. The policy aims to create a fit for purpose, accountable research ecosystem promoting
translational as well as foundational research in India in alignment with global
standards. Research and Innovation Excellence Frameworks (RIEF) will be developed
3

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
to enhance the quality of research along with promotion of engagements with relevant
stakeholders. Proper guidelines will be formulated to enhance the operating and safety
protocols related to R&D. Research culture will be reoriented to recognize social
impacts along with academic achievements.
6. The policy envisions strengthening of the overall innovative ecosystem, fostering
Science & Technology (S&T)- enabled entrepreneurship, and improving participation
of the grassroots levels in the research and innovation ecosystem. An institutional
architecture to integrate Traditional Knowledge Systems (TKS) and grassroots
innovation into the overall education, research and innovation system will be
established. Collaborations between grassroots innovators and scientists will be
facilitated through joint research projects, fellowships and scholarships. Grassroots
innovators will also be supported for registration, claiming the Intellectual Property
Right (IPR), filing of patent, or any type of legal claim with the help of Higher
Education Institute (HEIs). Advanced tools based on Artificial Intelligence (AI) and
machine learning will be used for curation, preservation and maintenance of heritage
knowledge.
7. The policy will promote technology self-reliance and indigenization to achieve the
larger goal of “Atmanirbhar Bharat”. A two-way approach of indigenous development
of technology as well as technology indigenization will be adopted and focused upon
in alignment with national priorities, like sustainability and social benefit, and
resources. International engagements will be facilitated to gain essential know-how
towards creation and development of indigenious technologies. A Technology
Support Framework will be created to facilitate this development. A Strategic
Technology Board (STB) will be constituted to act as a link connecting different
strategic departments. A Strategic Technology Development Fund (STDF) will be
created to incentivize the private sector and HEIs. Spin-off technologies resulting
from the larger projects will be commercialized and used for civilian purposes.
Knowledge and evidence driven approach will be used for identifying critical sectors
for the development of disruptive technologies.
8. The policy provides renewed impetus to the mainstreaming of equity and inclusion
within the STI ecosystem. An India-centric Equity & Inclusion (E&I) charter will be
developed for tackling all forms of discrimination, exclusions and inequalities in STI
leading to the development of an institutional mechanism. An inclusive culture will be
facilitated through equal opportunity for women along with candidates from rural-
remote areas, marginalised communities, differently-abled individuals including
Divyangjans, irrespective of their socio-economic backgrounds, proportionate
representation of women in selection/ evaluation committees, addressing of ageism
related issues and consideration of experienced women scientists for leadership roles
and regular gender and social audits in academic and professional organizations. The
Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Queer (LGBTQ+) community will be included
4

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
in gender equity conversations with special provisions to safeguard their rights and
promote their representation and retention in STI.
9. The policy will work towards mainstreaming science communication and public
engagement through the development of capacity building avenues through creative
and cross-disciplinary platforms, research initiatives, and outreach platforms. Locally
relevant and culturally-context-specific models will be developed along with
promoting cross disciplinary research in Science Communication. To improve
Science teaching, the engagements between science communication and science
pedagogy will be facilitated. Entertainment platforms such as television (TV),
community radio, comics etc. will be explored to take science to the last mile. Non-
Governmental Organizations (NGOs) and Civil Society groups will be involved
through popular science programmes and citizen science projects at local and regional
levels. Science Media Centres will be established at national and regional levels to
connect scientists with media persons and science communicators.
10. STIP charts pathways to a dynamic, evidence-informed and proactive international
S&T engagement strategy. Engagement with the Diaspora will be intensified through
attracting the best talent back home through fellowships, internships schemes and
research opportunities expanded and widely promoted across different ministries.
Appropriate facilitating channels will be created for remote contribution as well. An
engagement portal exclusively for the Indian scientific diaspora will be created. ‘S&T
for Diplomacy’ will be complemented with Diplomacy for S&T ’. International
Knowledge Centres, preferably virtual, will be established to promote global
knowledge and talent exchange. The number of S&T Counsellors will be increased
with redefinition and revitalisation of their roles.
11. A decentralized institutional mechanism balancing top-down and bottom-up
approaches, focussing on administrative and financial management, research
governance, data and regulatory frameworks and system interconnectedness, will be
formulated for a robust STI Governance. Appropriate mechanisms will be set up at
the highest levels for the overall (including inter-sectoral, inter-ministerial, Centre-
State and inter-State) governance of the STI ecosystem. A robust Research and
Innovation (R&I) governance framework will be set up to facilitate, stimulate and
coordinate R&D activities across the sectors. A Capacity Building Authority will be
set up to help plan, design, implement and monitor capacity building programmes at
the national and state level. A strong STI collaboration framework to strengthen
existing channels and create new ones for enhanced interconnectedness among all
relevant stakeholders at the domestic and global levels will be created, promoting
inter-institutional, inter-ministerial, interdepartmental and cross-sectoral vertical and
horizontal linkages and multi-stakeholder partnerships, to pursue projects in
alignment with the national priorities.
5

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
12. The policy outlines the institutional mechanism for STI policy governance along with
the implementation strategy and roadmap and monitoring and evaluation framework
for the policy and programs and their interlinkages. To serve all the aspects of STI
policy governance and to provide the knowledge support to institutionalised
governance mechanisms , a STI Policy Institute will be established to build and
maintain a robust interoperable STI metadata architecture. It will conduct and
promote nationally and internationally relevant STI policy research and strengthen the
science advice mechanism at national, sub-national and international levels. It will
develop long term capacity building programs for STI policy through training and
fellowships. An implementation strategy and roadmap will be devised for STI policy
and programs along with continuous monitoring and timely evaluation mechanisms.
The Science, Technology and Innovation Policy will be guided by the following broad vision;
(i) To achieve technological self-reliance and position India among the top three
scientific superpowers in the decade to come.
(ii) To attract, nurture, strengthen and retain critical human capital through a ‘people
centric’ science, technology and innovation (STI) ecosystem.
(iii) To double the number of Full-Time Equivalent (FTE) researchers, Gross Dimestic
Expenditture on R&D (GERD) and private sector contribution to the GERD every
5 years.
(iv) To build individual and institutional excellence in STI with the aspiration to
achieve the highest level of global recognitions and awards in the coming decade.
To capture the aspirations of a new, future-ready India, by ensuring active participation,
shared responsibility and equitable ownership of all stakeholders; transforming the national
STI landscape maintaining the delicate balance between fortifying India’s indigenous
capacity and nurturing meaningful global interconnectedness.
6

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
Science, Technology, Innovation Policy (STIP)
I. Building a robust Science, Technology and Innovation
Ecosystem for an Atmanirbhar Bharat
Science, technology and innovation (STI) are the key drivers for economic growth and
human development. As India marches ahead on a sustainable development pathway that
includes economic development, social inclusion and environmental sustainability towards
achieving an “Atmanirbhar Bharat”, a greater emphasis will be given on promoting
traditional knowledge systems, developing indigenous technologies and encouraging
grassroots innovations.. The emergence of disruptive and impactful technologies poses newer
challenges but brings great opportunities. A compelling lesson from COVID-19 has been an
unprecedented sharing of purpose, synergy, collaboration and cooperation that R&D
institutions, academia and industry have demonstrated. The new Science, Technology and
Innovation Policy (STIP) must harness the learnings and synergies from the new scenario to
take India on a new path of rapid economic and social development aligned with national
priorities and global competitiveness.
This policy aims to bring about profound changes through short-term, medium-term, and
long-term mission mode projects. The aspirations of the STIP policy in building a nurtured
ecosystem that promotes research and innovation on the part of both individuals and
organizations are:
1. To foster, develop, and nurture a robust system for evidence and stakeholder-driven
STI planning, information, evaluation, and policy research in India.
2. Enhancing financial resources for STI activities with a long-term vision through
public and private financing.
3. To address the transformative strengths and weaknesses of the Indian R&D
ecosystem in order to create a purposeful and accountable research ecosystem that
addresses the socio-economic need of the country and at the same time make the
country globally competitive.
4. To accelerate research (including multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary research)and
innovation in the HEIs in the country, and make education at all levels more inclusive
and connected with the economy and the society. In this regard, STIP fully endorses
the new National Education Policy (NEP) 2020, and wishes to ensure synergetic
efforts of both policies towards this goal.
5. To enhance capacity development for inculcating and promoting scientific temper
across the country’s people through equity, gender parity and inclusiveness catering to
the diverse needs of the country.
6. To develop scientific literature and media across Indian languages and geographies to
maximize the number of people that participate in and contribute to the scientific
discussions and processes in the country.
7

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
7. To promote open science and enable access to all outputs and data from public-funded
research and empower STI through means of effective ethical and regulatory
frameworks.
8. To facilitate interconnectedness and collaboration between the different stakeholders
in the STI ecosystem which will enable the addressing of complex issues requiring a
multidisciplinary approach, efficient utilization of resources, and translation of
research into applications.
9. To aim for collective and inclusive global development through international S&T
engagement, by maximizing the scope for indigenization, sustainability, and global
competitiveness.
10. To strengthen technological development to address the socio-economic needs of the
country and leverage India’s position at the global level in all technology areas with
special emphasis on sustainable technologies, strategic technologies, and mega-
science and thereby reduce the dependence on import of technologies.
11. To strengthen India’s competitiveness in STI and promote science diplomacy
internationally / at a global level so that the nation continues to maintain a competitive
edge in science, technology, innovation and research, globally.
12. To strengthen the STI ecosystem to build resilience for the future social and economic
disruptions.
13. To ensure a clean environment for the country’s people and its future generations,
through green initiatives based in science that promote sustainability and clean
energy, water, air, rivers, forests, parks, and neighborhoods.
14. To build an enabling ecosystem for seeding, sustenance, and growth of STI-enabled
entrepreneurship in India.
15. To strengthen national water, agriculture, food, and nutrition security as well as
ensuring employment generation through a robust STI enabling the environment to
ensure better lives for citizens, enhancing incomes for farmers, labourers and artisans,
and to create resilient and liveable human settlements, while sustaining natural
resources and safeguarding public health.
16. To catalyse the application of science to create a secure, clean, inclusive and equitable
energy system, reduce energy poverty, increase resilience against supply disruptions
and climate risks, and enable the transition to a cost-effective carbon future.
17. To enable innovation for better health outcomes and assured universal healthcare, that
is responsive to the needs of the people and that ensures the health security of the
nation
18. To strengthen India’s domestic supply chain management system in order to reduce
its reliance on imports of goods and services, improve its exports capacity and
ultimately improve its global value chain.
19. To seed, fund, and foster suitable and robust initiatives at HEIs, including
collaborations with government and with industry, in order to promote all these
critical aspirations.
8

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
II. Evolution of STI Policies in India
STI plays a significant role in fostering socio-economic and political development globally
and benefitting all the sectors through scientific and technological advances. STI acts as a key
determinant in addressing socio-economic challenges related to critical sectors such as health,
environment, education, food, energy, climate change, water etc. Indian Science and
Technology policies post-independent India were predominantly rooted in the ideas of self-
reliance and indigenous development across the sectors. Through such endeavours India’s
capacity for inclusive and cost-effective innovation has been recognized in the global
innovation discourse.
Four national S&T policies, Scientific Policy Resolution, 1958 (SPR1958), Technology
Policy Statement (TPS) 1983, STP2003, STIP2013 have guided the evolution of India’s STI
ecosystem. The first policy on science was adopted by India through the (SPR1958) which
laid the foundation for scientific enterprise and scientific temper in India. S&T were seen as
vehicles for the onward journey towards socio-economic transformation and nation-building.
By 1980, India had developed advanced scientific and technological infrastructure in the
areas of space, industrial research, nuclear energy, defence research, biotechnology,
agriculture, and health. Subsequently, with a focus to achieve technological competence and
self-reliance through the promotion and development of indigenous technologies, the TPS
was launched in 1983. It resulted in the establishment of the Technology Development Fund
and the formation of Technology, Information Forecasting, and Assessment Council
(TIFAC). These S&T policies took recourse to mass education and cultivation of science and
scientific research in HEIs for attaining technological competence. Economic liberalization
and globalization brought new challenges and opportunities in Science and Technology.
From 2000 onwards, India focused on the conversion of knowledge into wealth and value,
addressing socio-economic needs of the country and to amalgamate science, technology, and
innovation (STI). Accordingly, Science and Technology Policy 2003 brought together the
areas of S&T with the aim of increasing the investment required for R&D and innovation
in the areas impacting the economy and society. This led to the emergence of a strong
institutional mechanism through the creation of Scientific and Engineering Research Board
(SERB) under the ambit of DST to promote scientific and engineering research in the
country. The period following the S&T Policy 2003 is marked by a significant increase in
R&D Investment, a rise in publication ranking, and a steady increase in institutional and
human capacity. As a result, the decade of 2010 to 2020 was declared as the ‘Decade of
Innovation’ with the agenda to create a 21st Century National Innovation Ecosystem, to build
innovative institutions and mindsets for national progress. Science, Technology, and
Innovation Policy 2013 (STIP 2013) was formulated with the aim of positioning India
among the top five global scientific powers. The key features of this policy were to promote a
S&T -led innovation ecosystem in the country, attracting private sectors into R&D and
linking STI to socio-economic priorities. The 12th Five-year plan (2012-17) focused on the
9

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
creation and development of R&D facilities, building technology partnerships with states,
large scale investment in Mega Science projects, etc.
India is rapidly evolving with changing national and international dynamics. In the past
decade, the scope of policy instruments and regulatory environment has changed
significantly, resulting in a rise in the country's performance in terms of per capita R&D
expenditure, publications, patents, and quality of research publications, etc. Private sector
investment is also consistently rising in STI activities. There has been a notable rise in the
participation of women in R&D. A plethora of schemes have been implemented by the
government to support and stimulate R&D culture among students and young researchers.
Through previous S&T policies, India has been successful in building a robust STI
ecosystem. However, the new challenges today necessitate a different policy making
approach. The current pandemic has catalysed the need for a new policy instrument that
amalgamates profound and incremental approaches. Such a policy must adequately prioritize
and strategize across the STI landscape in alignment with United Nations - Sustainable
Development Goals (UN-SDGs) through a balance of short term mission-mode projects
along with long-term ones. There is a need to increase public funding and private investment
in R&D, boost existing FTE, build and empower critical infrastructure, improve governance
of STI initiatives, intensify global linkages in the STI sector, develop indigenous technologies
in key areas such as health, agriculture, energy, environment etc. Additionally, technology
capacity also needs to be enhanced to make India scientifically self-reliant and ready for
unpredictable exigencies. Thus, this policy instrument in its design and objective aims to be
evidence-driven, inclusive and bottom-up for the well-being of the nation and its people with
socio-economic and environmental considerations.
10

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
III. Chapters
Chapter 1: Open Science
1.1 National STI Observatory
1.2 Indian Science and Technology Archive of Research
1.3 Open Data
1.4 Open Access
1.5 One Nation, One Subscription
1.6 Indian Journals
1.7 Research Facilities
1.8 Open Educational Resources
1.9 Libraries
1.10 Learning Spaces
Priority Issues
To promote open science, the public will have the right to access all outputs from research
funded by the central government or the state governments, either directly or through funding
agencies, or institutions supported by the central government or the state governments
(hereinafter referred to as “publicly funded research”). The right to access will include, but
not be limited to, scholarly publications, research data1 and resources such as research
infrastructures2, instruments, computing facilities, libraries, learning spaces, etc.
Background
Open Science fosters more equitable participation in science through diverse steps like
increasing access to research outputs, more transparency and accountability in research,
inclusiveness, better resource utilisation through minimal restrictions on reuse of research
outputs and infrastructure, and ensuring constant exchange of knowledge between producers
and users of knowledge. It is important to make publicly-funded research output and
resources available to all to foster learning and innovation. STIP aspires to build an
ecosystem where research data, infrastructure, resources and knowledge are accessible to all.
1 Research Data: The term research data is defined as “recorded factual material/data that is obtained from
observations, experiments, surveys, analysis and other research activities of government-funded research
projects and deemed as objective and necessary to validate research findings,” as per the the definition of
research data in US OMB Circular A-110 (Steering Committee of the National Science and Technology Council
2018).
2 Research Infrastructure is not a universally defined term. Research infrastructure means facilities, resources
and related services that are used by the scientific community to conduct research. (European Commission:
Legal framework for a European Research Infrastructure Consortium – ERIC Practical Guidelines, DOI:
10.2777/79873)
11

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
A future-looking, all-encompassing Open Science Framework will be built to provide
access to scientific data, information, knowledge, and resources to everyone in the country
and all who are engaging with the Indian STI ecosystem on an equal partnership basis. This
framework will be largely community-driven and supported with necessary institutional
mechanisms and operational modalities. Supporting tools and applications will be developed
in all regional languages to widen the scope of accessibility and for meaningful use of data.
Interoperability and shared ownership, among the national stakeholders and international
partners, will be the key characteristics of this framework.
1.1 A National STI Observatory as a central repository for all kinds of data related to and
generated from the STI ecosystem will be established. The observatory will be centrally
coordinated and organized in distributed, networked and interoperable manner among the
stakeholders. Cross-cutting interoperable digital platforms within the observatory will be
organized into verticals, including but not limited to: (i) establishing knowledge and data
repositories; (ii) setting up a computational grid; (iii) developing a virtual communication and
interaction platform; (iv) enabling virtual access of equipment, laboratories and other
physical resources, talent mapping; (v) conducting analyses on projects, funding, outcomes,
technological capabilities, Technology Readiness Levels and Business Readiness Levels
(TRLs & BRLs); and (vi) establishing evaluation, accreditation, ranking and rating protocols
for benchmarking.
1.2 A dedicated portal, Indian Science and Technology Archive of Research (INDSTA),
will be developed to provide access, specifically, to the outputs of all publicly-funded
research (including manuscripts, research data, supplementary information, research
protocols, review articles, conference proceedings, monographs, book chapters, etc.).
INDSTA will be an integral part and connecting channel of the proposed national STI
observatory. INDSTA will be an open-access portal, interoperable with other repositories and
will facilitate interactions between researchers and users of the platform. It will have state-of-
the-art facilities, including storage, and features to facilitate flexible text and data mining,
querying, and visualization.
1.3 Open Data Policy for Publicly Funded Research: All data used in and generated from
public-funded research will be available to everyone (larger scientific community and public)
under FAIR3 (findable, accessible, interoperable and reusable) terms. Wherever applicable,
exceptions will be made on grounds of privacy, national security and Intellectual Property
Rights (IPR). Even in such situations, suitably anonymised and/or redacted data will be made
available. In all cases, where the data cannot be released to the general public, there will be a
mechanism to release it to bonafide/authorised researchers.
3 FAIR "Facets": Data should be Findable, Data should be Accessible, Data should be Interoperable, Data
should be Re-usable (https://www.force11.org/fairprinciples).
12

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
1.4 Open Access: Full text of final accepted author versions of manuscripts (postprints4 and
optionally preprints5) along with supplementary materials, which are the result of public
funding or performed in publicly funded institutions, or were performed using infrastructure
built with the support of public funds will be deposited, immediately upon acceptance, to an
institutional repository or central repository.
1.5 One Nation, One Subscription: The Government of India will negotiate with journal
publishers for a “one nation, one subscription” policy whereby, in return for one centrally-
negotiated payment, all individuals in India will have access to journal articles. This will
replace individual institutional journal subscriptions.
1.6 Indian Journals: Proactive steps will be taken to improve awareness and visibility of
Indian journals, and where required, will facilitate the creation of digital versions of print
journals to make them more accessible to the international scientific community.
Concentrated efforts will also be made to prevent the publication of fake journals.
1.7 Research Facilities: All public-funded scientific resources will be made shareable and
accessible nationally with the use of digital platforms. These scientific resources include, but
are not limited to research infrastructures, laboratory facilities and instruments, ICT and AI-
based resources and high-performance computing facilities.
1.8 Open Educational Resources: Public-funded open educational resources will be made
available under minimally restrictive open content license, with the right of attribution
preserved and translations (especially regional languages) permitted.
1.9 Libraries: Libraries at public-funded institutions will be accessible to the public, subject
only to reasonable security protocols. The public library system will be expanded to all
districts with the help of technological interventions.
1.10 Learning Spaces: Learning spaces will be made universally accessible, based on
international guidelines and standards, especially for people with special needs. Open and
equitable access to all learning spaces (including conference rooms and other infrastructure to
exchange and combine ideas) will be facilitated through a meaningful balance of traditional
methods and modern approaches. Emphasis will be given to create and strengthen more
community-driven learning spaces.
4 Post-Print- A “postprint” is any version approved by peer review.
https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/open-access
5 Pre-print- A “preprint” is any version of an article prior to peer review, such as a draft circulating among
colleagues or the version submitted to a journal.https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/open-access
13

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
Chapter 2: Capacity Development
2.1 Education and Research
2.2 Skill Building and Training
2.3 Infrastructure
Priority Issues
The aspirations of STIP are to fulfil multifarious responsibilities to function collaboratively
with all stakeholders; to promote holistic growth and development by developing scientific
temperament, quality, access, equity, incorporating citizenship education; to promote
linkages between higher education and industry to revamp economic systems; and to build
R&D infrastructure, its effective usage with easy and equitable access, is another aspect of
strengthening the STI ecosystem. Effective use of advanced technologies is much needed for
capacity building to improve learning outcomes, quality of science education, and equitable
access, leading to excellence in research and development and innovation. Promoting a more
significant interface between science and technology, humanities, and social sciences
disciplines is the need of the hour, which will enhance collaboration between S&T
departments, the industry as well as educational institutions to promote entrepreneurial skills
in vocational education.
Background
STIP aspires to reach towards sustained investments in science and technology that are
necessary to inculcate and promote scientific temper, nurture innovations, and cater to the
diverse needs of the country. The policy aims to give an impetus to individuals and
institutions in achieving top global awards and recognitions over the next decade.This section
outlines strategies to accelerate research and innovation in the country, improve our
education system and teaching-and-learning through research, and make education at all
levels more inclusive and connected with the economy and society. This includes as well as
adds to the initiatives in these directions described in NEP 2020.
2.1 Education and Research
There is a need to build an ecosystem in India that is neither dependent nor borrowed but
reliant on its own resources, strength and resolution with a pyramidal structure resting on a
broad base and not on its apex. Education and research should provide that foundation against
failure by inculcating true scientific temper, discipline and honesty, national pride, adherence
to the principles of justice, gender parity, ethical practices and spirit of fair competition and
brotherhood.
14

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
A new culture of Atmanirbharta (self-reliance) that includes Atmavishwas (self-confidence),
Atmasamman (self-respect) and Atmachintan (self-assessment) must be inculcated among
students at all educational levels.
2.1.1. Cluster School and Innovation hubs in partnership with higher education institutes,
private industries and local communities will be created, for sharing resources and capacities
relevant to curriculum renewal and faculty development. Innovation and Design Thinking
will be introduced in the curriculum. Upcoming and existing innovation related programmes
[such as Atal Tinkering Labs and Million Minds Augmenting National Aspirations and
Knowledge (MANAK)] will be developed synergistically across schools for better results.
Such programmes will be scaled up with a 10 year future looking strategy. These networked
initiatives should focus upon addressing different concerns of society.
Innovation and Entrepreneurship Centres will be established starting from the
undergraduate level of university education. Research in innovation practices will be made a
mandatory component of university/college teachers’ professional development programme;
The programme will provide faculty development programmes in Innovation and Design
Thinking. It will encourage and facilitate university/college teachers for international
research collaborations/exchange programmes in STI.
2.1.2 Creative processes to encourage and engage students in science and technology
education will be designed. A focused strategy will be developed to inspire pursuing of
science and technology education at all levels through a significant cultural transformation
within the ecosystem. To enhance Innovation quotient of the country, idea generation and
idea transformation ability right from early education will be encouraged.
2.1.3. The policy recommends representation of the ministries of S&T in the working
groups constituted for the revision of the National Curriculum Framework (NCF) of National
Education Policy (NEP) 2020. This would ensure designing appropriate curricula for
promoting science education early on in schooling. Similarly, curricula of the teacher
education programmes must be synced appropriately to the new learning paradigm.
2.1.4. A National School and Higher Education Mentorship Program will be
institutionalized through university-school linkages, showcasing a concerted focus on
innovation-oriented education at the school and the college levels. This special vehicle
programme will help the process of scouting and nurturing early talent by providing a
clear path for career building in science with aspirations for greater achievements. Innovative
learning programmes like DHRUV maybe widened in scope and scaled up.
2.1.5 For children with extraordinary intellectual abilities in a specific sphere of activity or
knowledge having limited opportunities to enter mainstream education, alternative pathways
will be charted to fully realize the achievement of their potential.
15

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
2.1.6 Students of all educational levels will be given opportunities to get exposure to be part
of leading science laboratories during the period of end-term breaks as part of Scientific
Social Responsibility Policy (SSR 2020).
2.1.7. Distance learning programmes will be strengthened with appropriate technological
means, in order to improve their quality and reach. Provisions will be made for virtual
classrooms, equipped with adequate resources and infrastructure.
2.1.8. National research and innovation programme on Assistive Technologies and
Learning Resources to be created. The programme will promote the use of technology to
create interactive personalized learning environments, for students with specific learning
disabilities at school as well as in Higher Education.
2.1.9. Research Excellence Framework for HEIs in India (REFI) will be evolved , which
aims for research assessment to secure the continuation of a holistic, dynamic and responsive
research base across the full academic spectrum within India’s higher education ecosystem.
REFI will assess the overall research contributions of HEIs every few years, based on
parameters of importance for India. Based on the performance in this assessment, block
research grants are given, with the value of such grants calibrated to provide an incentive for
HEIs to improve their performance and global standing.
2.1.10. Facilitate Internationalization of R&D in India to foster brain gain. More innovative
programmes in line with Visiting Advanced Joint Research (VAJRA) and GIAN (Global
Initiative of Academic Networks) to be introduced and their scope may be widened for
international faculty as well as students. Collaborations will be promoted especially across
the global south, to create an environment for global citizenship education.
2.1.11. The transition of education to research will be strengthened by including basic know-
how – and of skills in science communication –of research as a part of every Doctorate of
Philosophy (PhD) course curriculum. A framework for appropriate training and skill
building in this realm will be developed for postdoctoral researchers. This will enable them to
independently build their career in the STI ecosystem.
2.1.12. Studies will be conducted to analyse and forecast the sectors of demand and scope of
career building for PhDs and Postdocs to establish a complete mechanism. HEIs will be
encouraged to design integrated programs in Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics (STEM) (such as MS-PhD, MD-PhD) to catalyze optimum utilization and
retention of human resources in the country.
2.2 Skill Building and Training
2.2.1. To leverage the engagement of higher education systems with the economy and
community, all universities will be encouraged to be responsive and respectful to the needs of
16

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
the community by conducting interdisciplinary projects involving scientific and technological
and social science-based interventions.
2.2.2. ICT and online platforms for skill building are to be leveraged for active learning
practices, to promote research and innovation at all levels. Consortiums will be developed for
the creation of new online courses, simulations, virtual and remote labs for enabling
immersive experiential learning. A library of virtual resources will be developed through
community participation for remote areas. National institutes with advanced lab facilities will
be invited to develop such resources and make it available for others. Virtual Reality
repository can also be developed for this purpose. The repository will be supported with
interactive tools, viz. open-source collaborative development platform inviting data
visualization, data presentation, data analytics, AI, etc. for easy access.
2.2.3. Development of sector-specific skill-based knowledge support mechanisms for
regional communities to sustain the traditional skill and geographical indication.
2.2.4. Inclusion of various groups based on gender, geography, language, disability and
social order, to be promoted through special schemes, scholarships, need-based training and
orientation programmes.
2.2.5. Innovation and Entrepreneurship centres will be established at regional levels in a
collaborative approach with the participation of local Academic and R&D institutions,
industries, MSMEs, Startups, etc
2.2.6. Vocationally certified workforce will be employed and recognised by the industry.
Such kind of workforce will be incentivised through community grant schemes, by involving
independent communities and civil society organisations.
2.2.7. Teaching-Learning Centres (TLCs) will be created in urban and rural areas for
upskilling of faculty members, to enhance learning experience and engagement, for effective
outcomes. These centres will research on pedagogy as well as design and implement faculty
development programmes to improve the quality of learner engagement. Initiative will be
developed to recognize and nurture talent at an early age by creating roadmaps with the help
of a network of mentors at state and regional levels.
2.2.8. Administrative and management training programmes will be organized for faculties
and scientists to overcome functional silos and enhance efficiency of administrative and
research activities.
2.2.9. Increased focus will be put upon skill-building through hands-on training. For this
purpose, academic institutions will be encouraged to create long-term working relationships
with regional MSMEs to address locally relevant issues. Skill development opportunities will
be created in mega-science and related futuristic technology development engagements.
17

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
2.2.10. Formation of a trained management cadre at the national level for planning, assessing,
communicating and executing educational and research activities in HEIs and research
organisations. Conducive environment will be created by removing administrative and
other barriers for talented young people to take up appropriate leadership roles and participate
in critical decision-making.
2.3 Infrastructure
2.3.1. Higher Education Research Centres (HERCs) will be established in reputed
research-focused universities/institutes in different parts of the country. These centres should
also assess the overall direction of the higher education system in the country, and provide
research inputs to policymakers and higher education leaders.
2.3.2. Collaborative Research Centres (CRCs) will be established, that bring together
industries, MSMEs, startups, R&D institutions and HEIs with the government. This will
provide a long term ongoing collaboration between different STI stakeholders, to improve
industrial research and innovation and enhance global competitiveness.
2.3.3. Transforming existing R&D institutions to research universities. This will foster
better linkages between research and education and also enable effective utilization of
research infrastructure.
2.3.4. Centre and state governments will adopt a coordinated approach for building and
enhancing infrastructure for science laboratories, computer labs, language labs, libraries
etc. This will be achieved through centre-state partnership in order to improve the research
competency.
2.3.5. A mechanism for the maintenance of existing R&D infrastructure in academic and
R&D institutions will be developed ensuring the more efficient and effective utilization of
existing equipment facilities.
2.3.6. Establishing independently and professionally managed, self-sustaining equipment
infrastructures across the country. This will provide easy access and assistance on using the
Sophisticated and Analytical infrastructure to the Academics, R&D institutions, Industry,
MSMEs, NGOs, etc.
2.3.7. In line with the NEP 2020, a mechanism will be created to allow greater academic,
intellectual and functional autonomy to HEIs; one that is linked to accountability and also
strengthens Academia-R&D-Industry collaborations.
18

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
Chapter 3: Financing STI
3.1. Expansion of the STI financing landscape
3.2. Incentivization for STI investments
3.3. STI collaborative funding model
3.4. Governance of STI financing landscape
Priority Issues
India’s Gross Domestic Expenditure on R&D (GERD) is low in comparison to the developed
nations and most of the developing countries. There is inadequate private sector investment
along with inadequate enablers such as direct financial support to the private sector, public
procurement strategies, incentives to carry out and participate in R&D activities and
mechanisms for hybrid funding models. There is limited leveraging of foreign STI
investment and weak overall financial management of the ecosystem.
Background
A robust cohesive financial landscape remains at the core of creating an STI-driven
Atmanirbhar Bharat. It is imperative for this policy to work in tandem with the Fiscal and
Industrial policies of the Government to attract public as well as private sector contribution to
the national STI ecosystem leading to its strengthening. This section outlines financial
strategies to achieve such self-reliance and technology competitiveness in alignment with
national priorities and aspiration. It recommends the widening of financial outlay through
enhancement of public and private (domestic and international) STI investments along with
academic participation with a pivotal role of collaborative funding mechanisms. Fiscal
incentives and financial support have to be strengthened to stimulate private sector
participation in the national STI ecosystem. In order to drive strategic technological growth,
STI investments should be aligned with the critical areas of national priority through a
centralised programme as outlined in Advanced Missions in Innovative Research Ecosystem
(ADMIRE) programme. This process will be strengthened by a national STI Financial
Authority through efficient governance aimed at financial autonomy.
3.1 Expansion of the STI Funding Landscape
3.1.1. An STI unit with a minimum earmarked budget will be set up by every department
of the central, the state and the local governments, public sector enterprises, private sector
companies and startups to pursue STI activities with the larger goal of uplifting socio-
economic conditions of all citizens. Each unit will have an operational mechanism and
dedicated manpower and will develop plans that align with national priorities.
19

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
3.1.2. Diversification and enhancement of extramural funding in alignment with national
priorities is critical for expanding the STI landscape with respect to R&D activities. The aim
is to double the share of extramural R&D support of the Central government agencies in the
GERD in the next five years.
3.1.3. States will intensify participation in the STI ecosystem through enhanced financial
engagements. Each State will earmark a percentage of the state allocation for STI-related
activities under a separate budget head. Interlinkages will be strengthened between the central
and the state governments in terms of resource mobilization and budget sharing.
3.1.4. Public financial assistance is essential to invigorate the STI ecosystem through
increased allocation for innovation ecosystems, infrastructure and critical human resource
development with a special alignment towards critical sectoral growth.
3.1.5. Private financing: To build a robust innovation ecosystem, private enterprises along
with building in-house research capacity, will be encouraged to contribute and collaborate
with knowledge institutions to pursue market-relevant research through mutually decided
agreements. Industry clusters will be encouraged and incentivized wherever necessary, to
engage in collaborative R&D with a special focus on higher TRL projects to aid their
transition into equivalent BRLs. It is also recognized that Corporate Social Responsibility
(CSR) funds, as well as voluntary financing by big corporates and Indian multinational
companies (MNCs) will play a pivotal role as they are utilized to spur contribution to the
national STI ecosystem and specifically stimulate the research ecosystem in our education
sector.
3.1.6. Foreign MultiNational Companies (MNCs): Foreign MNCs play an integral role in
boosting India’s economy. To gainfully measure and assess the contributions made by
foreign MNCs in the STI financing landscape, innovative methods to capture them will be
developed. Opportunities for foreign MNCs to invest in the country’s STI landscape will be
strengthened and made more accessible. Partnerships and collaborations will be encouraged
with domestic private (Small and Medium Enterprises [SMEs] and start-ups) and public
sectors entities (HEIs and research organizations) to work on projects aligned to national
needs and priorities. The immense potential of foreign MNCs in STI human resource
development will be explored through envisaging joint training and skill-building
programmes.
3.2 Incentivisation for STI investments
Government-mediated incentivisation mechanisms act as a key stimulator for enhancing
R&D and innovation in both the private as well as in the public sectors. The incentivisation
instruments can be understood through its funding and execution patterns. Some of the key
incentives are underlined below:
20

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
3.2.1. Boosting fiscal incentives for industries investing in STI through incremental R&D
based tax incentives, tax credit for investing in facilities for commercialization, tax holidays,
tax waivers, target-based tax incentive for specific domains, tax deduction, expatriate tax
regimes, remodelling of patent box regime etc. There will be a reassessment of the possibility
of reviving weighted deduction provisions (of expenditure incurred on in-house R&D).
3.2.2. Enhancing financial support to industry,especially for MSMEs,for pursuing
research through innovation support schemes such as matching grants, small business
innovation grants (under fast track mode), innovation vouchers (SMEs), direct innovation
grants, risk guarantees,with special focus on high risk projects, revenue-based financing, seed
grants, loans, research subsidies, equity, research and IPR credits, open innovation scheme
etc. Innovation bonds along the lines of social impact bonds could be conceptualized to
incentivize the private sector to invest in STI-based startups. All funding agencies will fix
portions of their R&D budget to support MSMEs and other technology-oriented start-ups
with innovative business models in alignment with national needs and priorities. It is
recommended that financial incentives are provided based on stages of innovation involving
idea generation, prototype development, pilot innovation and its commercialization.
3.2.3. Flexible mechanism for supplier development programmes for public procurement
in all sectors (especially earmarked for Small & Medium Enterprises - SMEs and Start-ups).
3.2.4. Reassessment of regulatory control on STI landscape to promote innovative
enterprises. It is recommended that the Central Government re-examine and widen the scope
of R&D expenditure. Further, the government may determine the right mix of loan, equity
and grants to assist Indian industries for technology up-gradation and commercialization.
Further, to attract Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) in STI, reduction in corporate tax rates for
foreign MNCs, fast track clearances, easing land acquisitions, adequate means for
incorporating FDI etc. will be explored on a need basis.
3.3 STI Collaborative Funding Model
The ADMIRE- Advanced Missions in Innovative Research Ecosystem programme is
envisaged to achieve greater socio-economic self-reliance and STI leadership. It will be
characterised by portfolio based funding mechanisms which support distributed and localized
collaborative mission-oriented projects through a long-term investment strategy withKey
Performance Indicators (KPI). All stakeholders of the STI ecosystem including public,
private (local and MNCs), academic and other non-governmental sectors will be impactfully
engaged in the programme to ensure holistic participation and development of interlinkages.
The programme will extend to cross-cutting and critical domains that include but are not
limited to (with special emphasis on critical infrastructure support) strategic areas, areas of
economic and social security, emerging, sustainable and indigenous technologies and
traditional knowledge. The programme will also assist and direct public-private partnerships
for the development of STI knowledge-based infrastructure and creative assets. Under the
21

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
aegis of ADMIRE, industry-led R&D, with government support wherever necessary, will be
introduced. A Ministry or a group of Ministries in consultation with industry/industry bodies
will design and execute projects through co-funding mechanisms where they participate
equally. National laboratories and academia will be made part of the engagement.
3.4. Governance of STI Financing Landscape
To undertake efficient governing mechanisms for the STI funding landscape, a national STI
Financing Authority will be created. The centralised authority will play the following roles:
3.4.1. Strengthening financial outlay. A corpus fund will be established for investing in
various long and medium-term projects, commercial ventures, start-ups, technology diffusion
and licensing etc to address identified priority areas in the STI ecosystem. Central ministries
and associated departments lacking dedicated R&D units will establish concerned divisions
to augment the overall R&D budget and scope of allocation. An STI Development Bank
will be created to direct long term investments in select strategic areas.
3.4.2. Streamlining STI financial ecosystem through strengthening and providing greater
autonomy to existing funding organisations with the objective of promoting sector specific
research along with interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary research. Appropriate mechanisms
for funding decisions based on accountable peer review and a balanced expert committee
composition in terms of experience, age and gender will be strengthened. The incentivisation
system will be characterized by efficient governance to ensure ease in accessibility for private
players.
3.4.3. Modification/waiver of General Financial Rules, for large scale mission mode
programmes and projects of national importance will be explored. A new model for
funding, implementation and monitoring of such programmes will be developed, either as an
overarching mechanism or through obtaining cabinet approvals in respect of individual
programmes. In addition, certain GFRs will be required to be amended for funding of R&D
projects to facilitate ease of doing research.
3.4.4. Time-bound peer reviews along with technical and transactional audits will be
conducted from time to time to monitor public financing across various stakeholders of the
STI ecosystem. Efficient monitoring and evaluation mechanisms will be put into place for
gap analysis to support conducive investment in critical S&T areas. Selection of projects and
release of grants will be based on robust evaluation supported by innovative monitoring
mechanisms.
3.4.5. Formulation of a mechanism for timely disbursal of grants and regular networking and
communication among funding agencies: The disbursal of research grants for scientific
projects, fellowships to research scholars and stipends to students carrying out advanced
research and higher education are crucial measures to ensure excellence in scientific research,
22

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
education and innovation. Timely disbursement of such grants and funding is most important
recognition for good research work. In this respect, a fixed annual evaluation cycle of grants
and funds disbursal would be effective. Regular interactions and engagements among funding
agencies also bridge the gaps in communications and disbursement of funding.
3.4.6. In the Higher Education sector, centralised norms for allocation of overheads will be
formulated by funding agencies.
3.4.7. The National STI Observatory6 will encompass an open centralised database platform
for all financial schemes, programmes, grants and incentives existing in the STI ecosystem.
6
Refer to Chapter 1 Section 1.1
23

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
Chapter 4: Research
4.1. Expanding S&T system: Promoting foundational and translational Research
4.2. Enhancing the quality of research
4.3. Engaged research
4.4. Ease of doing research
Priority Issues
India should emerge as a globally competitive country in strategic fields of research, while
simultaneously focusing on unaddressed and under-addressed nationally important problems.
A special emphasis on R&D activities in the priority areas will address the current
weaknesses in Indian research and ensure strengthening of key areas relevant to the well-
being and prosperity of India and its people.
To become a research leader, India should focus on mission-mode programmes, in priority
sectors, with technology and innovation deliverables built on a strong foundation of basic
science; ensure that the research is fit for purpose; enhance the quality of research and also
increase the ease of doing research.
Background
During the last decade, India emerged as a major knowledge producer, ranking in the top five
countries. However, in terms of impact, India’s scholarly citations helped it gain a place in
only the top ten countries. Similarly, India also featured in the top ten countries in the total
number of patent applications filed. However, the research output from India should also be
seen in the light of the fact that India has significantly lower FTEs (per million population)
engaged in R&D activities and GERD than the leading countries such as the USA and China.
The strengths and weaknesses of the Indian R&D ecosystem need to be holistically
addressed.. This Chapter outlines strategies to transform and create a fit for purpose,
accountable research ecosystem in India within the ambit of a rapidly changing world.
4.1. Expanding S&T system: Promoting foundational and translational
research
India will strive to expand its share in the global research output. Apart from continuing to
invest in inputs, it would also strive to create a seamless STI ecosystem by adopting a holistic
approach that addresses all stakeholders of the ecosystem. To make the R&D system
forward-looking, seeding of new research fields in advanced areas will be encouraged such as
Mission on Integrated Child Protection Scheme (ICPS). To address key challenges in fields
of priority areas of national importance, profound research will be promoted and advocated
across the STI ecosystem. Quality foundational research in areas of disruptive potential will
24

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
be encouraged. Simultaneously for the relevance of translational research, early direction
from government and industry and society would be sought.
Expansion of the S&T system will be done through a focus on 1) priority areas in which India
should emerge as a world leader, 2) addressing local problems, and 3) engagement and
participation of industry to ensure R&D also aligns with industry needs.
4.1.1 Mission mode programmes with deliverables for technology and innovation will be
established in the priority sectors (e.g. Agriculture, Water, Health, Energy and
Environment) along with identification of challenges and opportunities in these sectors based
on current and future needs. Pathways to leverage the resources in order to achieve the goals
will also be identified.
4.1.2. Strong collaborations that build quality science for national problems will be
encouraged and frameworks for such mutually beneficial collaborations will be encouraged at
both individual and institutional level.
4.1.3. Team science collaboration will be facilitated between industry and academia,
with shared financial resources, and risks and benefits. Industry-led R&D programmes in
priority sectors will also be encouraged through ADMIRE7. Specific technology areas for
development can be identified by a ministry or a group of ministries in consultation with
industry/industry bodies.
4.1.4. Domestic manufacturing capacity in specific areas of priority sectors will be enhanced
through R&D and technology upgrade.
4.2. Enhancing the quality of research
4.2.1. Through Research and Innovation Excellence Frameworks (RIEF)8 , research
quality will be enhanced by expanding the talent pool and through international
benchmarking exercise. Joint appointments across government, academia and industry at
both the national and the international levels will be facilitated to attract the best talent into
the research ecosystem. Mentoring programmes and supplementary incentivization
mechanisms will be developed to guide and motivate early career researchers and young
scientists to realize their potential to conduct meaningful research. Risk-taking in R&D will
be incentivized and suitably rewarded at the individual and the institutional levels.
4.2.2. Research culture will be reoriented wherein the quality of research will be
assessed, recognized and rewarded on the basis of both academic achievement as well as
social impact. Research ethics will be given due importance.
7Refer to Chapter 3 Section 3.3
8
Refer to Chapter 11 Section 11.2
25

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
4.2.3. Operating and safety protocols related to R&D will be enhanced through the
formulation of proper guidelines. Minimal safety requirements for labs will be mandated
for upcoming R&D infrastructure.
4.3. Engaged research
The STI ecosystem needs a focus on delivering what is needed, which requires strong
engagement with stakeholders (industry, academia, R&D labs and social actors). Research
solutions should address a plurality of solutions for different regions/socio-economic strata
including a focus on rural problems in the country. It also requires the development of
products, processes, technology etc. that incorporates engagement, testing and feedback from
the end-user from an early stage in order to ensure uptake, impact and benefit to the society.
In addition, a lot of publicly-funded research is largely invisible to target stakeholders such as
the line ministries who often contract out research that has already been carried out, but of
which they are unaware. Therefore, indigenous utilization of research outputs will be
promoted by user-tested development and dissemination of information to the relevant
stakeholders. To achieve this, a function will be created to scan and share indigenous research
with stakeholders and promote programmes and approaches that are relevant to line
ministries. It will also identify gaps and communicate them to research funders. The function
will also ensure that user-stakeholders are engaged from an early development stage,
particularly for technology projects.
4.4. Ease of doing research
Apart from the primary activity of doing research, researchers also have to spend a
considerable amount of their time (and resources) on administrative activities related to
research projects. Journal paywalls, and lack of data and knowledge sharing further hampers
their ability to freely and easily conduct research activities. To reduce the administrative
burden on the researchers, digital platforms and e-governance will be used for grant-
management -all activities from award, funding and utilisation of grants to measurement of
research outputs. International best practices of grant management will also be explored.
Access and sharing of knowledge and resources will be improved through the use of online
platforms such as INDSTA9, implementing open data10 and open access policy11, and by
enabling access to journals and databases12. Benchmarks for ‘ease of doing research’ will be
developed so that research activities are adequately funded, are less bureaucratic and
accountability is in both directions i.e. the donor and the receiver.
Connecting the invention ecosystem with the innovation ecosystem will be emphasised.
Further, weakness in the invention and innovation ecosystem will be identified to take
research into the market and to the community. Both knowledge pull from the invention
system as well as the knowledge push from the innovation ecosystem are necessary to
achieve the goal of a vibrant R&D ecosystem in India
9 Refer to Chapter 1 Subsection 1.2
10 Refer to Chapter 1 Subsection 1.3
11 Refer to Chapter 1 Subsection 1.4
12 Refer to Chapter 1 Subsection 1.5
26

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
Chapter 5: Innovation and Entrepreneurship
5.1. Strengthening Innovation Ecosystem
5.2. Fostering S&T-Enabled Entrepreneurship
5.3. Integrating Grassroots Innovation with the Research and Innovation Ecosystem
Priority Areas
Strengthening the innovation ecosystem to attain sustainable economic progress and global
competitiveness. Creating an enabling ecosystem for seeding, sustenance, and growth of
science and technology entrepreneurship in India. Integrating Traditional Knowledge
Systems (TKS) and grassroots innovations into the education, research and innovation
system.
Background
Systemic investments in STI are not only critical for creating, shaping, and sustaining the
future industrial sectors of the nation but also crucial for delivering the benefits of scientific
research for the economic development of the society at large. There is a need for a
comprehensive support framework for strengthening and enhancing India’s innovation and
entrepreneurship landscape by encouraging wider participation in innovation activities, broad
basing the funding ecosystem, enhancing interconnectedness and streamlining regulatory
regimes. This Chapter outlines strategies for strengthening the overall innovative ecosystem,
fostering S&T-enabled entrepreneurship and improving participation of the grassroots levels
in the research and innovation ecosystem.
5.1. Strengthening Innovation Ecosystem
The innovation landscape emanating from the socio-cultural, geographical, economic,
historical and political contexts will be systematised, strategised and synergised to attain
sustainable economic progress and global competitiveness. STI efforts and interventions will
be aligned with policies of different sectors and themes, including education, skill
development and industrial growth.
5.1.1. The distinct roles of multiple stakeholders including higher-education institutions,
research and development organisations, funding agencies, regulatory bodies, non-
governmental organizations and business enterprises in the innovation ecosystem, will be
recognised and their inter-linkages are to be strengthened, at the national, the subnational and
the sectoral levels.
5.1.2. Industry –Academia linkages will be deepened by joint programmes for both academic
experts and young scholars with industry practitioners, to harness the expertise and get
27

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
practical exposure. Such linkages at the school and the undergraduate levels will further
strengthen the foundation laid by the NEP 2020 to foster critical thinking and scientific
temper. Provisions for extended sabbaticals in academia and industry will be widely
promoted to support knowledge and expertise exchange between industry and academia.
5.1.3. Innovation clusters and technology parks will be developed and leveraged for
collaborative activities, cost sharing and Intellectual Property (IP) creation. The stakeholders
in these spaces will be incentivised based on performance and periodic assessments.
5.1.4. Theme-based distributed virtual incubators and accelerators will be created in different
parts of the country using cluster-based approaches. Such new models of incubators will be
supported by adequate financial incentives, mentoring and expertise.
5.1.5. Mission-oriented efforts will be incentivised for tackling various local and/or region-
specific issues of societal relevance. Cross learnings across states will be encouraged. This
will address developmental challenges and help in realising Sustainable Development Goals.
i. The investment will be prioritised in “core R&D” rather than “peripheral R&D”
especially in the manufacturing sectors.
ii. Frameworks, scales and measurements will be developed and utilised for assessing
innovation. These frameworks/surveys will facilitate integration and diffusion of
innovation-led activities at regional and national levels as well as enhance global
value chains and networks.
iii. An ecosystem of R&D and innovation will be created in rural and remote areas,
particularly in North East, islands and tribal areas. Research and academic institutions
as well as innovation clusters will be built in such geographical locations.
iv. For promoting gender inclusion in entrepreneurship, avenues will be created to access
resources and opportunities for training and mentoring. Equitable provisions will be
created for the participation of women in entrepreneurial networks/clusters.
5.1.6. Special focus will be given to creating a conducive environment for sector-specific
innovation. Overarching bodies with focus on sector-specific-policies, regulation and trade
agreements will be created/strengthened, that can work as a synergistic agency to bring all
others on a single platform and push forward the sector-specific agenda with support from the
government, the academia, the non-profits, the private partners and the industry. This will
help in avoiding overlaps and in developing connections with all the agencies involved in
innovation. This will also enable the monitoring and evaluation of the activities. A
mechanism for coordination on innovation will be developed among various departments and
ministries such as agriculture, animal husbandry, veterinary sciences, entomology, wildlife
and forest conservation, health department and related organisations.
28

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
5.2. Fostering S&T-Enabled Entrepreneurship
S&T-enabled entrepreneurship-technology-driven, innovation-focused enterprises - is critical
for creating, shaping, and sustaining the future industrial sectors of the country as well as
delivering the benefits of scientific research for socio-economic development of the society.
An enabling ecosystem for seeding, sustenance, and growth of science and technology-
enabled entrepreneurship calls for:
5.2.1. Investing in basic, foundational, and reliable physical and social infrastructure for
S&T -enabled entrepreneurship to thrive. This includes investments in key infrastructure
in HEIs, Scientific R&D laboratories, hospitals, ICT across the country as well as
complementary mission driven investments in research and development with S&T-enabled
entrepreneurship in critical technology areas. This also includes promoting entrepreneurship
education programmes across the country by involving local communities i.e. schools, higher
educational institutions, non-profit organizations, scientists, entrepreneurs, and other
stakeholders.
5.2.2 The policy will put in position enabling mechanisms for development and growth of a
start-up culture by proactive empowerment, infrastructure building and funding opportunities.
Incentivization mechanisms will be set up to aid the expeditious conversion of ideas into
start-ups.
5.2.3. Inculcating a culture of S&T-enabled entrepreneurship by ensuring provisions for
an end to end support to promote enterprise creation. This includes creating a continuum
of well-integrated funding and technology support programmes to support science and
technology-enabled entrepreneurship from the ideation, proof of concept, and prototype
development stages to the testing, validation, and manufacturing stages of innovative
enterprises.This also includes enhancing public procurement, supplier development
programmes, and corporate open innovation schemes to incentivize innovation from a wide
range of participants.
5.2.4. Creation of a nurtured and supportive environment for S&T-enabled
entrepreneurship and entrepreneurial ideas to flourish and thrive. This includes
encouraging wide-based participation from stakeholders in the STI ecosystem (private sector,
public sector enterprises, non-profit organizations, cooperatives, industry associations etc.)
but also in leveraging existing domain knowledge and expertise of highly successful STI-
based enterprises and entrepreneurs in reaching scale and impact.
5.2.5. Reducing systemic risks in S&T-enabled entrepreneurship through clear,
accessible, and current regulatory guidance and providing funding support across all
stages of innovation. This includes streamlining overlapping regulatory regimes to ensure
compliance for meeting product standards, setting quality controls, reducing barriers to risk
capital by innovation-focused enterprises, and fostering wide-based stakeholder support for
funding science and technology-enabled entrepreneurship.
29

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
5.2.6. Enhancing consistency, speed, clarity, and transparency in programme delivery
for early-stage S&T-enabled entrepreneurship. This includes streamlining and
consolidation of overlapping schemes, enhancing awareness, and reducing bureaucratic
hurdles in accessing existing schemes. A centralised database on all forms of financial
incentives will be made available to promote incentives for innovation and enable continuous
monitoring and evaluation of program performance.
5.2.7. Creation of globally competitive innovative enterprises by stimulating investment
towards building indigenous technological capabilities across a diverse range of S&T-
based entrepreneurial activities. This includes a national level strategic approach to
incentivize geographical concentrations of interconnected companies and institutions in
technological and product markets which complements a focussed localized strategy to
enable flexible structures, incentives, processes and culture towards improving commercial
viability in science and technology areas.
5.3. Mainstreaming Grassroots Innovations and Traditional Knowledge
Systems
For integrating Traditional Knowledge Systems (TKS) and grassroots innovation into the
overall education, research and innovation system, an institutional architecture will be
established in different technical and research institution campuses, to recognise and involve
grassroots innovators, which in turn will inspire students to innovate. Avenues for
collaborations between grassroots innovators and scientists will be initiated/facilitated
through joint research projects, fellowships and scholarships. Also, crowdsourcing will be
encouraged, wherever possible, to improve the innovative capabilities and productivity.
5.3.1. Advanced tools based on machine learning and AI will be used for curation,
preservation and maintenance of heritage knowledge. Scientific and technical collaborations
of the Ministry of Culture with scientific ministries will be promoted to find solutions for
recreating and maintaining the heritage and TKS.
5.3.2. Assessment, testing and vetting of various kinds of traditional knowledge applicable in
agriculture, biodiversity, healthcare, climate change and other locally relevant thematic areas,
will be encouraged.
5.3.3. National strategic resource management through the Medplant E-Consortium of vital
plants will be created for distribution, availability, sustainability, and vulnerability of vital
medicinal plants. A focus to secure and sustain the demand-and-supply succession of vital
medicinal plants of commercial use for allopathic medicines will be facilitated.
5.3.4. The Grassroots innovators will be supported for registration, claiming the IPR, filing of
patent, or any type of legal claim with the help of HEIs. Training for marketing their
30

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
innovations, establishing start-ups and market networks in the territories of tribal hamlets and
placing adequate systems for quality control and standardisation will be developed to support
grassroots innovations.
5.3.5. Avenues for entrepreneurship development will be created to foster a vibrant grassroots
startup ecosystem. Incubators and accelerators will be incentivised to support scaling up and
commercialisation of grassroots innovations, developed by social R&D organisations. This
would generate opportunities to innovate full-fledged alternative solutions to local problems.
5.3.6. Technology Parks will be built to serve as a centre for demonstration, communication
and technology transfer. It will also be responsible to train personnel on locally relevant
technology development and management.
5.3.7. New funding mechanisms will be developed and investment in knowledge
intermediaries/Extension and Advisory Services (EAS) will be made and knowledge sharing
platforms will be expanded.
5.3.8 New fiscal incentives, financial schemes, subsidies will be examined to commercialise
innovation and catalyze investments into R&D.
5.3.9. Research efforts will be encouraged for developing cost-effective technologies and
encourage grassroots innovations to reduce drudgery, address the scarcity of farm labour, and
improve efficiency in sectors like agriculture, water, and energy.
31

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
Chapter 6: Technology Development and
Indigenisation
6.1. Technology Indigenisation for Atmanirbhar Bharat
6.2. Technologies and Sustainability
6.3. Strategic Technologies
6.4. Disruptive Technologies
6.5. Critical Sectors and possible approaches
6.6. Enhancing technology development in the academic sector
Priority Issues
India is largely dependent on the import of technologies in the priority sectors. The TRLs in
the country is low as compared to its global counterparts due to lack of interface systems,
inadequate technology capacity, poor quality of research outcomes, weak linkages and
procurement policy clauses. There are additional challenges in leveraging India’s
participation in mega-science projects in terms of building technological core competence
domestically and translating those know-hows to benefit other sectors.
Major hurdles for India in achieving technology indigenisation are: unbalanced allocation of
resources between academic and Post-academic Research (PAR), unavailability of trained
human resources, weak interconnect between stakeholders, lack of effective strategy for
development, deployment and commercialisation.
Background
This chapter outlines strategies for strengthening India’s STI ecosystem to achieve the larger
goal of “Atmanirbhar Bharat” through technology self-reliance and indigenisation. This will
play a vital role in enhancing our capability to successfully tackle socio-economic and
environmental challenges. To achieve this, India needs to embrace a culture which respects
industrial work by faculty and students, and new technology tools such as artificial
intelligence, biotechnology, green manufacturing, cybersecurity, and collaborative robotics,
relearn, implement and build upon traditional methods that are proven in the national context
and intensify systemic interlinkages to catalyse technology scaling up and mass deployment.
6.1. Technology Indigenisation for Atmanirbhar Bharat
Aligned to national priorities along with the aim of achieving a self-reliant economy, a two-
way approach to technology development will be adopted: a) developing indigenous
technologies and b) adapting imported technologies. There will be increased focus towards
promoting efforts in the development and demonstration of indigenous technologies,
development of capital goods and absorption of imported technologies. Further engagement
32

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
of Indian diaspora in the development of technology through reverse brain drain, circulation,
and skill transfer will be encouraged.
A facilitating policy environment will be created to strengthen and scale-up the on-going as
well as forthcoming large technology missions such as waste-to-wealth, deep sea exploration,
quantum frontier, AI mission, translation technologies for Indian language and biosciences
for human health, etc.
6.1.1 Indigenous Development of Technology
The policy will focus on the indegenous development of technology premised upon
assessment and understanding of societal needs keeping in context evolving solutions to
people-centric problems. Indigenous innovation/development of critical products/components
will be strengthened by the sharing of work between collaborating agencies, technology
institutions and industry with funding raised primarily from the stakeholders. Indigenous
technologies will also be promoted even if better technologies exist internationally.
Key products or components imported by Indian companies for their manufacturing plants
will be identified and a provision will be made to fund such product-based R&D with
industry-academia collaborations or through industry – academia consortiums. Existing
mechanisms will be strengthened or new mechanisms, if needed, will be evolved to bring in
Indian industry-both private as well as Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs) to help bridge the
gap from lab to indigenous manufacturing capacity. This will enhance India’s export
capacities and strengthen its global value chain.
6.1.2. Technology Indigenisation
To strengthen India’s local R&D capabilities in the production of technologies that are
largely being imported13, infrastructure will be set up and existing mechanisms will be
strengthened to adapt existing technologies to suit the local needs. This will primarily meet
the needs of technology production as well as reduce large scale import in selected sectors of
domestic importance such as electronic hardwares for home appliances, railways, intelligent
transport, cleantech, defence, etc. Initiatives like building a robust semiconductor ecosystem
will strengthen India’s position in the strategic sectors.
6.1.3. International Engagement for Technology Development and Adaptation
More focus on gaining access to the international knowledge base by importing technology in
disembodied form as technological know-how will be ensured. All institutions involved in
13 Indigenization of technology will focus on two major categories:
a. Indigenization of product (eg. aircrafts, warships, etc.) in large platforms by national R&D labs
like DRDO, DAE, an so on
b. Indigenization of individual subcomponents of system (eg. turbines, sensors, etc.) by
academic labs, industry, and startups
33

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
Mega Science Projects will be required to invest in effective collaboration modality from
conceptualisation to delivery to acquire the scientific capability which would promote
indigenous development of technology. Adapting and commercialising technologies based on
mega science IP can create the momentum needed for the Indian ecosystem with a focus on
domestic demands and environment. Further, institutional mechanisms will evolve to
encourage collaborations with the diaspora for technology development. Promotion of global
to local linkage can only strengthen the Atmanirbhar strategy of the Government.
6.2. Technologies and Sustainability
India needs to develop and deploy sustainable technologies at a faster rate to successfully
tackle the major socio-economic challenges and changing aspirations of the people. Along
with this India has to develop and deploy those technologies indigenously which aim for
bringing sustainability and inclusive growth benefiting the society at large. Thus, there is
a need to create a conducive environment which ensures that sustainable development and
technological progressions complement each other and enable inclusive and bottom-up
innovations with collective efforts of various stakeholders including knowledge generators
and knowledge user agencies and institutions. The policy aims to bring interplay between
technology and sustainability and its impact on society, environment and economy. It
attempts to provide pathways to promote sustainable technology development as well as
achieve sustainability through effective process approach of technology delivery for green
and affordable technology solutions and absorption for mass application leading to a better
quality of life and services.
There will be a technology support framework that will build on the excellence of India’s
basic level research expertise through assisting small and large public and private players to
innovate, commercialize and deploy need-based technologies, including indigenous
technologies, at speed, scale and effectiveness to meet UN-SDGs and national priorities.
Sector-specific working groups will be formulated to advise on the assessment of key
sustainable technologies and prioritize UN-SDGs deficits to bridge the systemic gaps across
the stakeholders. There will be a focus on technologies with a potential for large scale
change, either in numbers or in enhanced resource use efficiency or management and
utilization of wastes for a circular economy. This will require the establishment of Guidance
and Tools to assess technologies across sectors through the Sustainability Guidance
Platform at national and regional levels, which assesses their social, environmental and
economic value impacting sustainability at the evolution, deployment and adoption stages.
Development and promotion of better resource management in priority sectors like water,
agriculture, climate change, and energy will also be taken up. Both in the urban and rural
sectors, partnerships to enhance technology investments in smart and sustainable
communities will be facilitated to ensure CSR and social scientific responsibility together.
On the other hand, the development of sustainable technologies should be of paramount
importance for India’s ICT sector. Institutional mechanisms for development and
34

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
promotion or flow of sustainable technologies will be created across the country to
promote development as well as up-gradation of existing indigenous and traditional
technologies directed towards the attainment of UN-SDGs and national priorities as well.
These institutional mechanisms will play a vital role in the validation and certification of
sustainable technologies for mass scale replication, predictive analytics and adoption at
the users’ level. Sustainable technology development addressing social and environmental
concerns will also aim at financial sustainability that will lead to the creation of affordable
and accessible technologies with a specific focus on frugal innovations and frugal
technologies with triple bottom line impact. In addition, the use of sustainable technologies
for resource efficiency will be widely adopted and advocated. This process will involve the
creation of standard guidelines for collection, handling, processing and recycling of waste
along with efficient and sustainable use of natural resources by nurturing local skills and
capacities to the next level.
6.3. Strategic Technologies
Acquiring technological capabilities is a dynamic process which is essential for the
development of a country. The regional and global geopolitics along with the economic
dynamics and fast-changing technologies trigger the concept of Strategic Technologies for a
State. India being a fast-developing country and aspiring to become a global superpower
faces difficult and bigger geopolitical and economic challenges. It is vital for the country to
increase its technology potential in strategic sectors such as space, nuclear, cyber,
biotechnology, etc. and hence needs a careful policy approach. Also, whenever India acquires
technology from abroad, there should be an indigenisation plan for the product so as to avoid
the import of the same item including its versions in future. This is to emphasize that the
Country cannot depend on the import of strategic technologies from abroad forever. Strategic
technologies can be bought only if they are inevitable once but not as a routine. The expertise
of academic and industry needs to be effectively utilized in the strategic sector and an
overarching body can play an important role to have better coordination in technology
selection, development, utilization, commercialization and also establishing coordination
with different stakeholders.
6.3.1. Strategic Technology Board (STB)
An overarching body, “Strategic Technology Board (STB)” will be constituted to act as a
connecting bridge between different strategic departments and to monitor and recommend
technologies to be bought or indigenously made in the strategic departments or in private
sector or in academic institutions in line with self-reliant India. The Board will have the
responsibility to prepare a roadmap for the strategic requirements of the country and also
monitor its implementation. The roadmap will guide the development processes leading to
technology development. It will also be chartered to ensure there is no duplication of
technology development amongst departments, research institutions and deep participation of
35

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
academics and private sectors in strategic technology development. Both the requirements
and the technologies will be benchmarked against global status.
6.3.2. Strategic Technology Development Fund (STDF)
A Strategic Technology Development Fund (STDF) will be created to encourage the
private sector and HEIs to develop strategic technologies. It will be managed by the
independent body Strategic Technology Development Board to avoid conflict of interest. The
funding will follow a clear policy on the innovation life cycle. Appropriate policy in
consultation between the Department of Higher Education and the strategic departments will
be framed to enable the students who have experience in strategic projects more than three
years, to have the necessary weightage to join the strategic departments.
Public agencies sponsoring the effort behind any innovation have to play a role in identifying
an industry partner to take the innovation to market. The STDF will fund twice a year for pre-
specified goals, provide guidance, and monitor the progress of the project/s continuously,
while STB will review the project and ensure it is taken for a logical conclusion to utilize the
technology. An e-platform for selection of innovators and beneficiaries to meet and interact
will be created to facilitate this process. Identified academic institutions will have a number
of project posts to work in this area and an appropriate policy may be framed to enable the
students who have considerable experience in strategic projects to get necessary weightage to
join the strategic departments.
6.3.3. Partnership with HEIs and Private Sectors for Strategic Technology
The strategic sectors will be extended beyond the government departments to HEIs and
private sectors to enhance innovation in the strategic sector. Departments like the Department
of Atomic Energy (DAE), Department Of Space (DOS), and Defence Research and
Development Organization (DRDO) will be tasked to undertake certain developments only
with industry and academic partners. The induction of industry and HEIs will be restricted
with protection clauses, in order to enhance the nation’s growth and to avoid dependence on
other nations for strategic technologies. Institutions will put up necessary infrastructure such
as security measures to start with. They will be required to follow minimum acceptable
scientific or ethical standard and safety certification protocol. The potential expertise of the
academics and industry will be tapped to undertake the design and developments with
necessary non-disclosure agreements, for the benefit of the country. Further, private
sectors will be encouraged to compete in the global market space under national guidance. A
strategic export policy to enable private players to thrive in the international market
will be formulated.
36

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
6.3.4. Spin-off Technologies for Civilian Use
Mission oriented projects and technologies developed for the strategic sector lead to a lot of
spin-off technologies and there is an opportunity for start-ups and government to add
commercial value to it. A peer group under the guidance of the STB will decide which
technologies are suitable for such transfer, possibly with the involvement of the
appropriate industry for cost effectiveness. While all strategic sectors have a mechanism to
progress spin-off technologies, they will be strengthened to give a boost to the process.
6.3.5 Strategic technologies and critical data resources: Application to society
Several strategic technologies and critical data sets such as those produced from geospatial
activities and studies will have wide ranging applications to the society. Considering the
country's rich demographic dividend, concentrated efforts will be made to utilize the potential
of such critical resources to indigenize and innovate key tools, infrastructure and applications.
6.4. Disruptive Technologies
Emerging technologies that are disruptive in nature have transformational impact on society,
economy and environment. The focus will be on innovative strategizing, development,
standard setting and governance of such technologies keeping in background the lessons
drawn from other technological interventions.
6.4.1. Mission mode schemes/programs will be launched to propel the development and
deployment of frontier disruptive technologies such as blockchain, AI, 3Dimensional (3D)
printing, Quantum Internet of Things (IOT), etc. that impact society and the economy across
the sectors.
6.4.2. A coordinated technology governance mechanism will be put in place to synergize the
policy decisions among various stakeholders, national as well as global, about technology
development, procurement and deployment, and involve industry, academia and government.
6.5. Critical Sectors and possible approaches
Keeping in mind national priorities, in some key sectors such as agriculture and animal
husbandry, water, education, biotech, pharma and health, biodiversity, climate change and
environment, and manufacturing and small-level starts up will be encouraged. The
Government will use the knowledge and evidence-based approaches by developing a
cadre of practising scientists and technologists who are dedicated full time to curating
and updating knowledge and its application in emerging sectors. These teams of
scientists can work to collect and present the most relevant and important information to
address current challenges. One possible approach to frame it, could be in the form of fifty
prestigious science policy fellowships at the mid-career senior level, where academics,
industry personnel and NGO scientists/technologists will be encouraged to undertake such
challenges.
37

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
6.6. Enhancing Technology Development in HEIs
Indian universities normally do not pursue R&D beyond TRL-1. There is a huge gap in the
domain of commercialisation. Funding mechanisms will be created to pilot the
technologies developed in academic/research institutes. Understanding of TRL among
scientists, researchers, developers are different, the languages, risks, and scales of funding are
different at various levels - university level, industry level, and the grassroots.
Communication and collaboration gaps among the levels will be bridged to create a
conducive environment for translational research. Novel ways with institutional linkages for
translational research leading to new startups and scaling-up opportunities will be recreated
wherever necessary. Additionally, the funding agencies will be encouraged to introduce
sector agnostic, but stage-specific schemes supporting all stages of innovation. A provision
allowing stage-specific lateral entry into the schemes will ensure that a scientist/researcher
has the clarity and liberty to reach out for support based on the ‘Readiness Level’ of the
project. In accordance with India’s policy priorities, a balanced approach in inducing efforts
and investments across the TRLs and BRLs will be undertaken.
38

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
Chapter 7: Equity and Inclusion (E&I)
7.1. Mainstreaming Equity and Inclusion
7.2. Institutionalising Equity and Inclusion
7.3. Assessing Equity and Inclusion
Priority Issues
There is an inequitable participation in STEM with respect to gender, social, regional and
economic diversity in India. Moreover, there is also an absence of an inclusive culture in the
practice of science, besides inadequate incentives and institutional arrangements. Lack of
E&I related assessment indicators, frameworks and instruments also exist.
Background
In the Indian context, equity and inclusion in STI originate from the wide socio-cultural and
economic settings and contexts. The need for Equity and Inclusion in STI is an addition to
India’s on-going efforts to build equitable STI capacity and capability as well as to create
social, industrial and territorial inclusivity in the processes of STI. Drawing inspiration from
some of the interventions like Stand up India (2016), Technology Vision 2035 (2016),
Scientific Social Responsibility Policy 2020 (SSR 2020) and the recent National Education
Policy (2020), the STI Policy aims to address discriminations and inequities based on gender,
caste, religion, disability, geography and language for the advancement of STI.
While E&I is brought in an all-encompassing manner in earlier chapters, this chapter
highlights some aspects of E&I which need explicit mention. It discusses policy interventions
to bring about structural and institutional transformations for the participation, promotion,
retention and incentivisation of excluded and marginalised groups, particularly the vulnerable
sections of the society.
7.1. Mainstreaming Equity and Inclusion
E&I should be added as a sub-text to all STI policies and processes (existing and
upcoming), designed to create and nurture a vibrant STI ecosystem, in an inclusive manner.
It will be the foundational element of the STI ecosystem. The policy will foster equitable and
effective participation, promotion, retention and incentivisation to do science and
innovation,which include traditional knowledge and address inequities in STI, stemming out
from the country’s socio-economic and cultural landscape. E&I in STI is not only to be seen
from the point of view of correcting historical injustices and compensating for earlier
deprivations, but also to make real impacts such as to increase the number of FTE researchers
and to contribute to socio-economic development.
39

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
7.2. Institutionalising Equity and Inclusion
Taking into consideration inequalities stemming out from the country’s socio-economic and
cultural landscape, an E&I Charter will be developed for tackling discriminations in STI,
based on gender, caste, religion, geography, language, disability and other exclusions
and inequalities. The Charter will be India-centric, drawing essence from different E&I
frameworks like the Athena SWAN (Scientific Women's Academic Network) Charter14. It
will aim to create a cognitive thrust among STI related institutions, for recognising their
commitments in promoting equity and inclusion and address hindrance in the advancement of
STI.
7.2.1. Creating Inclusive Culture
i. There will be equal opportunity in academics for women along with candidates from
rural – remote areas, marginalised communities, differently abled groups, irrespective
of their caste/creed/religion/race.
ii. Enhanced representation of women, at least 30% of the total strength, in all decision
making bodies including selection and evaluation committees will be mandated.
iii. A specific highlight will remain upon promoting talented women scientists in
leadership positions across research and science administration to create inspiration
for women aspiring to pursue science careers.
iv. The Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Queer (LGBTQ+) community to be
included into all the conversations related to gender equity. Provisions will be made to
safeguard their rights and promote their representation and retention in STI.
v. Differently-abled individuals, including Divyangjans, will be given special attention.
Institutions are to be mandated to make structural and cultural changes for supporting
such excluded groups, in order to pursue and practice STI.
7.2.2. Networks for Awareness, Outreach and Mentorship
i. Efforts will be made to attract young women/girls and other excluded groups (in
school – early college) and foster awareness and interest in STEM fields and
eventually, careers in science.
ii. Relatable, relevant role models are to be created and existing role models and
mentorship programmes will be scaled up.
iii. On-going initiatives in different public and private institutions, science academies,
etc. are to be scaled-up. Partnerships will be created with existing agencies and
institutions involved in such activities, at national and international levels. Adequate
funding and resources can be allocated to promote and sustain such networks.
14
The Athena SWAN Charter is a framework established in 2005 in the United Kingdom (UK). It aims to help and encourage
institutions in achieving gender equality. It supports the promotion of inclusive working practices that can increase retention of
valued academics and professional and support staff, demonstrating the institution's commitment to an equitable working
environment. The framework has been adopted by various countries like Ireland and Australia (the SAGE initiative). India is
working towards contextualising a similar framework to mainstream and institutionalise E&I in STI.
40

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
7.2.3. Recruitment, Retention and Promotion
i. Ageism-related issues and minimisation of career breaks are to be addressed for
effective retention of trained women into the STI workforce. In this case, all
professional career milestones, such as recruitment, awards and funding schemes, age
cut-offs will be implemented considering academic age rather than biological/physical
age. This will not restrict to gender but will include a broader context.
ii. Dual recruitment policy will be encouraged in all governing bodies, funding agencies,
so that couples do not face the challenge of ‘choosing’ a spouse's career over theirs.
The aim is to bring gender neutrality through such interventions.
iii. Flexibility in work timings and adequate parental leave will be provided to cater to
maternity, childbirth, child care and other emergent needs. Childcare benefits should
be gender-neutral.
iv. The LGBTQ+ community will be entitled for spousal benefits (including retirement
benefits) to any partner irrespective of their gender (specified by the STEM
employee).
v. All public-funded research institutions and universities to have a daycare centre for
young children of employees and also provision for elderly care, wherever applicable.
7.2.4. Institutional Mechanisms
Based on the principle of the Charter/framework, an institutional mechanism will be created
to bring about diversity, equity and inclusion in STI. It will aim to remove barriers to
participation, promotion and incentivisation and ensure the recruitment, retention and
effective engagements of the excluded groups and marginalised communities. The given
mechanism will also take into account the following aspects:
i. Provisions will be made for sensitisation, orientation, counselling with regard to
gender, sexuality, ethnicity, language and disability, prior to initiation of training,
education, recruitment and/or funding. Ethical training on sensitivities of various
biases-invisible or otherwise- must be imparted to all.
ii. Regulatory provisions are to be strengthened for ensuring examination and enquiry of
complaints about discrimination, biases and harassment. It will be followed by
disciplinary action proportionate to the severity of the offence, as is done for other
forms of ethical misconduct.
7.3. Assessing Equity and Inclusion
7.3.1. Concerted and collaborative efforts are to be made with institutions having expertise
and knowledge in E&I-related research. The collaboration of researchers in gender studies,
social sciences and science policy with scientists will be encouraged to understand E&I-
related gaps and barriers.
41

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
7.3.2. Frameworks, instruments, databases and indicators will be developed to understand
E&I-specific issues in STI and provide evidence to related STI policies and practices.
7.3.3. Statistics will be collected on drop-out rates of women, Divyangjan community,
socially and economically backward communities, individuals from remote areas and other
marginalised groups in science education and research. E&I datawill include, but not be
limited to, sex-disaggregated data on STI, data on suicide rates and mental health issues in
STI.
7.3.4. Academic and professional organisations will be encouraged to conduct gender audits
and social audits, to propel the organizations to proactively promote gender neutral
recruitment and retention of employees, for ensuring equitable,not necessarily, equal
representation. These processes will have adequate representations from all marginalised and
excluded groups, to address issues of E&I in a more cohesive manner.
42

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
Chapter 8: Science Communication and Public
Engagement
8.1. Capacity building
8.2 Research
8.3 Outreach
8.4 Mainstreaming Science Communication
Priority Issues
There exists a disconnect between science and society at large with limited scope for citizen
engagement in the STI ecosystem. The scarcity of professional and vibrant science outreach
and education programmes, along with limited science communication15systems for
addressing language and regional diversity of India hampers the understanding of grassroots
issues. The dearth of online and multimedia platforms for reciprocal engagement between
scientists and society act as a barrier to taking science to the masses equitably and
inclusively.
Background
It is the fundamental duty of every Indian citizen to "develop a scientific temper, humanism
and the spirit of inquiry and reform". In alignment with this constitutional requirement, there
is an overarching aspiration to address social problems using STI. Although there are several
existing mechanisms and institutions for science popularisation, communication gaps still
exist between scientists and society which hampers citizens’ participation in scientific
endeavours. Science communication has the potential to bridge these gaps. Hence there is a
need for creating awareness and recognition for science communication as a field of practice,
building a strong research ecosystem in the field, developing a mechanism for training and
capacity building, networking and mentorship. STIP recognises the need for scientists to
engage effectively with the general public and is keen to ensure that such engagements are
fruitful. It aims to revitalise the science communication ecosystem and promote the reciprocal
relationship between science and society by the democratisation of science through upstream
engagement and a citizen-centric approach. This Chapter outlines strategies to mainstream
science communication and public engagement through capacity building avenues, research
initiatives and outreach platforms.
15 Science communication mentioned here includes science outreach (dissemination of
scientific knowledge to non-expert audience through science popularisation activities and
science journalism) and science inreach (expert to expert communication of research findings
through scientific writings and deliberations).
43

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
8.1. Capacity Building
8.1.1 Creative and cross-disciplinary platforms of Science Communication will be
promoted and facilitated to make STI accessible to all. Such platforms would enable dialogue
and knowledge transfer between researchers, science communicators and the public, raising
awareness on local issues and facilitating necessary behavioural change.
8.1.2 Citizen science projects, stakeholder consultations, co-creative experiences, and
policy interventions will be supported. Community-centric programmes and regional
science centres will be encouraged to promote science communication in regional
languages with local and hyper-local contexts for last-mile connectivity.
8.1.3 Infrastructure for training and capacity development for science communication
will be created to conduct and facilitate courses, workshops, internships, Massive Open
Online Courses and mentorship. Short term courses in science communication will be
introduced appropriately at all levels of education.
Science communication skill sets will be incorporated as a necessary component for different
levels of scientific training starting from school level and progressing through undergraduate,
graduate, postdoctoral, professorial, etc.
Appropriate incentives for career progression and continuous professional development
opportunities for science communication professionals will be provided.
8.1.4 Dialogue will be facilitated and promoted to discuss themes at the intersection of
science and society by developing centres, programmes, workshops, and talks. A dedicated
national conference for science communication as well as science communication sessions
within scientific conferences will be organised to build a network of science communicators
and facilitate the exchange of knowledge, skill and experiences.
8.1.5 Publicly accessible, constantly updated, and searchable databases of science
communication-related resources and opportunities will be facilitated.
8.2 Research
8.2.1. Cross-disciplinary research on science communication will be facilitated through
national programmes, centres, research grants, fellowships, and positions. Themes like
critical thinking, countering misinformation, promoting scientific temper, and frameworks for
evaluating Science Communication will be encouraged.
44

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
Research would also involve identification of the barriers to science communication
including stereotypes particularly for women involved in Science Popularisation activities,
and mechanisms to promote engagement between scientists and social scientists.
High impact, open access academic journals for publishing science communication-related
research will be popularised.
Science communication research requires locally relevant and culturally-context-specific
models for public engagement in regional languages.
8.2.2 Learning and collaborations for intertwining science engagement and science
pedagogy will be facilitated to improve science teaching and for the better incorporation of
the history and philosophy of science, scientific method and critical thinking within science
education.
8.2.3 The scope of entertainment platforms such as folk arts, theatre, dance, poetry,
comedy, comics, maps, community radio, interactive digital platforms will be explored for
the dissemination of scientific knowledge.
8.3 Outreach
8.3.1 In line with the national policy on Scientific Social Responsibility (SSR 2020),
scientists and researchers will be motivated and incentivised to engage in Science
Communication and Public Engagement Activities. Institutes and organizations will be
encouraged to earmark a percentage of allocated budget (SSR fund) for science
communication and public engagement activities.
8.3.2 NGOs and other civil society groups will be involved for popular science
programmes and citizen science projects at the local and regional level that include
environment monitoring, biodiversity mapping, etc. Innovative ways of involving a variety of
stakeholders such as politicians, NGOs, industry and social scientists, in such outreach
programs and projects will be explored.
8.4 Mainstreaming Science Communication
Despite several attempts to popularise science, mainstreaming of science communication has
met with little success. There is a need to bring such activities from the periphery to the
forefront.
8.4.1 A national level science movement for popularising science among students and
inculcating interest for the sciences among the masses will be launched. This will include
organizing science festivals, exhibitions, plays, webinars and other creative modes of
engagement to make science learning exciting. The focus of the movement is to motivate
45

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
children and youth to pursue science careers. Similar movements may be initiated by States
and Union Territories (UTs) individually and in collaboration with the Central government.
8.4.2. The existing science museums infrastructure will be strengthened using advanced
technologies such as augmented reality and virtual reality, etc. through collaborative efforts
among relevant ministries. Efforts will be made to build a museum of natural history to make
people, especially young individuals, aware and enthused to pursue learning in sciences.
8.4.3 Every public-funded institution and department will have a dedicated wing set-up for
science communication and public engagement in STI-related activities.
8.4.4 Funding channels will be diversified through Public-Private Partnership (PPP) models
to promote science popularisation activities.
8.4.5 Science Media Centres will be established at national and regional levels as an
interface between media persons, scientists and science communicators that can enable
mainstream media to increase its coverage of scientific topics.
46

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
Chapter 9: International STI Engagement
9.1. Participation in Global STI Agenda Setting and Governance
9.2. International Bilateral, Multilateral and Regional Engagements
9.3. Participation in Large S&T Initiatives
9.4. Engagement with Indian Diaspora
9.5. Proactive STI Diplomacy Strategy
Priority Issues
The changing and challenging global STI landscape has created issues related to technology
governance, standards, ownership, ethics, dual-use and market access. Formulating a
dynamic, evidence-informed and proactive international S&T engagement strategy and
associated facilitating mechanism are crucial to keep pace with the changing global scenario.
There is a pressing need to play a more proactive role in global STI governance, including
agenda and standard setting for frontier S&T areas.
India’s international S&T engagements will
i. recognise intertwining of academic and post-academic16 research. International STI
engagements will emphasize on application-oriented research to provide economic,
social, environmental solutions.
ii. focus towards technology indigenization.
iii. focus on emerging and need-based technology areas to develop and strengthen the
technology base of the country.
iv. be based on the concepts of “equal partnership” and “value-positive narrative” as
appropriate. Wherever desirable, India will play an agenda-setting role.
v. have a strong focus on application in the near term as a developing country, even as
long-term perspectives continue to drive academic research.
vi. focus on generating relevant outcomes for the country’s developmental needs.
This chapter outlines strategies for strengthening India’s STI engagement internationally.
9.1. Participation in Global STI Agenda Setting and Governance
9.1.1. India will take up a proactive agenda-setting role in global S&T discourse,
including, but not limited to, standards and regulations - particularly, concerning
emerging, disruptive, critical, futuristic and dual-use technologies and their application areas.
A focus will remain on boosting technology competence and adaptation that will catalyze the
achievement of national priorities. India will participate in major international projects and
16
Research is classified into Academic Research (AR) and Post-Academic Research (PAR) which are
intertwined. PAR embraces and motivates contextual AR. AR and PAR can be compared to NASA TRL scale.
TRL1 corresponds to AR and the rest to PAR.
47

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
alliances, preferably as a founding member in the forthcoming ones, and support such
partnerships financially, wherever appropriate. India’s position and engagement with leading
international agencies, including various UN bodies, Organization for Economic Co-
operation and Development (OECD) committees, and World Bank groups etc., will be
strengthened.
9.1.2. Priority areas will be identified for international engagements to contribute to UN-
SDGs. International STI engagements will also be aligned with national SDG strategies.
9.1.3. Data aspects, in all its forms, will be considered carefully in all the international
engagements, keeping in view the balance between various aspects including privacy, ethics,
ownership, sharing research data,academic freedom and very importantly, national security.
Given the range and volume of data that Indian population contributes, India will play a
proactive role in the global discourses on (a) use of data as a tool for negotiations and (2) data
governance and regulatory frameworks.
9.1.4. India will seek active participation in the global technology control regime and
intensify the efforts for membership in strategic alliances.
9.2. International Bilateral, Multilateral and Regional Engagements
9.2.1. Taking various external factors into consideration, dedicated and customized
engagement strategies will be adopted for bilateral, multilateral and regional/ neighbourhood
S&T engagements. Existing engagements will be adapted accordingly.
9.2.2. Engagements will emphasize on being sector/issue -focused, mission-oriented, time-
bound, and with identified deliverables. Role of industry and academic players will be
identified, and their perspectives and requirements will be included at every stage of the
engagement. Successful domestic sector-specific industry-academia cluster models will be
emulated and scaled up in international engagements as well.
9.2.3. STI policy will be closely aligned with foreign policy priorities particularly in regional
and neighbourhood S&T engagements. People-to-people connection with expert
collaborations would be the core of such engagements.
9.2.4. Using the country’s S&T strength as soft power to its fullest potential, India will strive
to take leadership roles in multilateral and regional platforms, wherever desired and needed.
9.3. Engagement in Large S&T Initiatives
Large S&T Initiatives have multiple objectives, such as addressing some fundamental issues
in science by participating in international collaborative research, developing cutting edge
technologies, establishing scientific facilities of international standard in India, training of
researchers, engineers and industry professionals, design and delivery of major precision
48

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
equipment for these and utilizing spin-off technologies emanating from them towards societal
benefits.
9.3.1 To make India self-reliant in cutting edge technologies and setting-up world class
scientific infrastructure, India will participate in the large S&T projects from the position of
strength. Synergising the strengths of scientific capabilities and forging innovative paths in
association with industry are essential for India to attain a leading position in technology and
commerce.
9.3.2 Major projects in key areas having larger societal impacts will be thoughtfully planned
as medium and long-term home-grown projects in target-specific indigenous developmental
areas like food and water security; health-care; clean and affordable energy, rural and urban
amenities and communication and connectivity. This will be attained by leveraging the expert
base of many research areas, who could engage in collaborative and cooperative work to
achieve a well-defined goal.
9.3.3 A pragmatic approach will be followed in selecting and committing to international
S&T projects-considering national scientific interests, technological capabilities, and
availability of financial and personpower resources. For a seamless translation of laboratory
science to production activities, enhancement of necessary capabilities in industry and
handholding by the scientific community is recommended. Meticulous planning, close
monitoring, accountability, mid-course corrections, a sound management structure and
rigorous consultations involving competent leaders and industrial partners are proposed.
9.3.4 Beneficiary base of the large-scale S&T activities will be extended by strengthening
Inter-University Centres, which have been playing major roles in drawing the academic
community in the implementation of projects and utilization of facilities. A career and
multifaceted skill- development plan for the scientists and engineers engaged in these projects
will also be rolled out for effective utilization of their talents.
9.4. Engagement with Diaspora
As for the engagement with Indian diaspora is concerned, the policy direction is to create a
fine balance between attracting the best talent back home and creating facilitating channels
for the diaspora to contribute in national development from wherever they are.Appropriate
institutional mechanisms and suitable opportunities will be created to engage with the Indian
diaspora more effectively.
9.4.1. The untapped potential of a highly-skilled scientific diaspora will be leveraged. While
the reverse brain drain (or brain gain) is encouraged by creating suitable opportunities for the
returning Diaspora. The opportunities will not only be restricted to faculty positions, but also
for pre-faculty and advisory roles. Challenges related to hiring in terms of transparency,
49

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
accessibility and accountability will be addressed to attract early and mid-career researchers
back to the country.
9.4.2. Government has already initiated specific fellowships and internships to support
active researchers/ scientists/engineers who want to return to India from abroad and
contribute their work for the country. Such schemes and research opportunities in India will
be expanded and widely promoted across different ministries to attract diaspora.
9.4.3. To promote brain circulation, appropriate facilitating channels will be created for the
non-returning diaspora to contribute back to the country. Significant efforts will be made in
identifying and communicating the facilitating channels to the diaspora. These facilitating
channels will be widely popularized so that diaspora gets fully aware of the ambit of channels
for contributing back to society in terms of economic support such as philanthropic funding,
entrepreneurship support, and intellectual support.
9.4.4. An engagement portal exclusively for Indian scientific diaspora will be created.
This portal will act as a one-stop focal point for the technical and scientific diaspora to
engage with the Indian ecosystem.
9.4.5. Diaspora organizations and S&T Counsellors will be engaged in to create a global
academic and entrepreneurial network. Such networks can create avenues for bringing
together a distinguished group of Indian scientists and technocrats worldwide to participate in
high-level consultations for key priority sectors and technological applications.
9.4.6. Policy instruments, programmes and schemes will be developed to attract the best
global talent/ skilled human resource, through Indian diaspora networks and connections.
Additional focus will be given to establishing institutional mechanisms to retain the skilled
human resource, and eventually, build and expand the domestic capacity.
9.5. Proactive STI Diplomacy Strategy
9.5.1. Post-COVID-19 situation provides India with both challenges and opportunities. It
opens up new avenues for India’s international S&T engagement and leadership. For the ease
of connecting with international counterparts, appropriate formal and informal linkages will
be developed.A proactive approach will be taken to strengthen existing partnerships and
create new partnerships.
9.5.2. A forward-looking international STI engagement framework will be put in place
supported by necessary institutional mechanisms and programmes, including components
such as fellowships, joint research programmes, cross-incubation programmes and extended
network of science and innovation counsellors.
50

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
9.5.3. Role of S&T in defining foreign policy priorities will be vitalized. Strong linkages
with various divisions of the Ministry of External Affairs will be institutionalized. In addition
to pursuing ‘S&T for diplomatic benefits’, Diplomacy for S&T development’ will be
promoted.
9.5.4. Membership in S&T-focused strategic multinational groups, global consortia and
technology regimes will be pursued proactively. Multilateral dialogues will be initiated with
key partner countries on matters related to all aspects of technology and innovation, including
issues around technology governance.
9.5.5. International Knowledge Centres play a crucial role in enabling access to critical
human resources from across the globe. Such International Centres, preferably Virtual, will
be established to promote global knowledge and talent exchange by creating avenues such as
visiting fellowships, joint research schemes, training programmes, invited lectures etc.
9.5.6. The number of S&T Counsellors will be increased and rationality behind having an
S&T counsellor in a specific country will be reviewed periodically. The role of S&T
Counsellors will be revitalised and redefined given evolving technologies, nature of national
demands and changing global dynamics. S&T Counsellors will be empowered to create
opportunities for greater participation of the Indian scientific community,both in India and
abroad.
51

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
Chapter 10: STI Governance
10.1. Institutional Architecture
10.2 Research and Innovation Governance
10.3. Strengthening STI Interconnectedness
Priority Issues
Science, Technology and Innovation (STI) governance mechanisms need to be made more
efficient both administratively and financially. Dynamic monitoring, evaluation and
incentivization framework need to be strengthened. In addition, it is imperative to address
issues related to rationalising data and regulatory frameworks.There is also the challenge of
weak interconnectedness across the ecosystem.
Background
A strong STI ecosystem can prosper only when premised upon an efficient governance
mechanism with functional autonomy, transparency and adaptability to changes. Currently,
our STI ecosystem is faced with the challenges related to institutional architecture, issues of
research and innovation governance and weak interlinkages. To address these impediments
from a perspective of efficient governance, there is a pressing need to chart a path of
institutional synergy at the local and global levels. This Chapter outlines strategies for
implementing modern and scientific governance to ensure India’s preparedness for meeting
the current challenges and future directions.
10.1. Institutional Architecture
A decentralized institutional mechanism balancing top-down and bottom-up approaches,
focussing on administrative and financial management, research governance, data and
regulatory frameworks and system interconnectedness, will be formulated for a robust STI
Governance. The governance mechanism will focus on ensuring the autonomy of function for
stakeholders complemented with accountability. Best practices in governance mechanisms
will be mapped for cross-learning among relevant stakeholders.
10.1.1 To provide renewed focus and stimulation to the STI ecosystem, an appropriate,
governance mechanism with centralised coordination with de-centralised functionality
will be set up
10.1.2. An inter-sectoral, inter-ministerial national level STI Governance mechanism
will be set up at the highest level, for building synergy and improving coordination among
various ministries/departments/organizations to strengthen national STI ecosystem
52

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
10.1.3 An interlinked, Centre-State, inter-State governance mechanism will be created at
the highest level for better coordination between the Centre and the States and to enhance
overall participation of the States in research and innovation.
10.2 Research and Innovation Governance
10.2.1. A robust Research and Innovation (R&I) governance framework will be set up and
adequately linked with the proposed ‘National Research Foundation’ (NRF)17 to facilitate,
stimulate and coordinate R&D activities across the sectors. This will be guided by the overall
STI governance mechanism set up at the highest level.
10.2.2 Lateral recruitment (minimum 25%) of professionals and subject matter experts will
be mandated in all scientific ministries for a finite duration with comparable roles,
responsibilities and empowerment to a regular official.
10.2.3. Institutional interventions will be made to address issues related to individual
researchers and research groups in terms of creating a conducive working environment. A
particular focus will be given to academic mental health issues including peer pressure,
mentor-mentee relationship and work-life balance.
10.2.4. A suitable metric will be developed to evaluate and recognize the outcome and impact
of research activities with respect to its direct relevance to Indian needs, while continuing to
maintain international comparability. This metric must reflect the meaningful impact of
science on society, solving local problems and resource optimization among others.
10.2.5. Standardized Research and Innovation Excellence Frameworks (RIEF), based on
international benchmarks, will be formulated to ensure cohesive and transparent evaluation of
all kinds of research and innovation. The framework will set cross-country benchmarking
tools that will be positioned to assess the performance of STI in key priority areas, using a set
of indicators such as sectoral R&D progress, patents, and other knowledge products.
10.2.6. Capacity development efforts for R&I will be strengthened through the establishment
of a Capacity Building Authority. This will help in planning, designing, implementing and
monitoring of capacity building programmes at the national and state levels.
10.2.7. The STI Policy Institute and other think tanks, will perform regular technology
assessment, foresight and advisory activities.
10.2.8. To ensure transparency, accessibility and accountability within the STI ecosystem, a
comprehensive administrative and financial management will be put in place within the
broader R&I governance framework. It will further assist in streamlining programmes and
17Refer to National Research Foundation: NEP 2020, Chapter 17
53

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
schemes to avoid duplication of efforts and resources among various ministries and
departments. It will further aid in strengthening the translational research chain and its
management by providing necessary support mechanisms through the life cycle from
inception of an idea to product development and commercialization.
10.2.9. To promote STI across the ecosystem, an STI enabling environment will be created
to stipulate funding opportunities, ownership, product certification, market access, and public
procurement. The enabling ecosystem will be facilitated by (i) enhanced fund availability
through various sources including from public and private sectors, (ii) joint ownership of
patents in consortia-led R&D, (iii) financial support for patent filing costs, (iv) monitoring of
risks and antitrust activities, (v) market creation by easing public procurement norms (review
L1 criteria) and supply chains, particularly for startups and MSMEs, (vi) updating product
certification standards and accredited testing facilities for emerging innovations, and (vii)
fast-track accelerators and incubators.
10.2.10. The national IP regime will be strengthened and issues related to IP ownership,
licensing, sharing, commercialization (patent box regime), transfer modalities and IP related
regulatory frameworks will be streamlined. Patent filing and management processes will be
made simpler and less time-consuming. There will be focus on raising mass awareness
related to IP along with sensitizing young researchers and scientists about processes for
patent filing, maintenance and commercialization. There will be close cross-linking between
the instruments and priorities of the national IPR policy and STI policy.
10.2.11. In consultation with relevant stakeholders, a robust data governance mechanism
and associated guidelines will be formulated for scientific data,including research data, to
ensure appropriate data classification, ownership, storage, interoperability, retention, ethics
and privacy.
10.2.12. A renewed and coherent regulatory framework will be devised which facilitates
synergy among the already operating national and state regulatory agencies to cut across their
functional silos. It will ensure harmonized, enabling and transparent regulatory frameworks
for speedy translation of innovations from institutions for commercialization in a competitive
market place. Sector-specific regulatory frameworks and guidelines will be strengthened
and streamlined to promote effective execution of research and innovation in key sectoral
priority areas.
10.2.13. The R&I framework will also play a pivotal role in Standard setting for STI related
activities. It will guide the collaborative creation and strengthening of minimum acceptable
standard guidelines across industries and sectors for certification and validation.
10.2.14. A component of anticipatory governance will be built into the overall R&I
governance framework to prepare the country for unforeseen crises and emergencies.
Establishment of a central focal point for appropriate forecasting, planning and execution,
will be explored. Additionally, robust surveillance and early warning systems for emerging
54

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
threats such as infectious diseases will be strengthened through technologies such as digital
health, artificial intelligence, mobile labs and so on.
10.2.15. To strengthen security in sectors such as health, food, agriculture and environment
etc, scientific, technical and regulatory expertise will be sought to promote open innovation
and equitable access across the ecosystem. In the health sector, an enabling environment for
large scale and low cost manufacturing of essential products such as drugs, vaccines and
medicines will be promoted, including innovative licensing approaches where necessary.
10.3 Strengthening STI Interconnectedness
10.3.1 A strong STI collaboration framework to strengthen existing channels and create
new ones for enhanced interconnectedness among stakeholders at the domestic and global
levels will be created. This framework will outline institutional mechanisms to promote
effective and outcome-driven collaborations and generate a common pool of resources. It will
lead to inter-sectoral, interdisciplinary, and inter-institutional collaboration for sectoral
innovations.
10.3.2. The collaboration framework will focus on promoting inter-ministerial and inter-
departmental linkages across sectors to pursue collaborative projects in alignment with the
national priorities. Inter-institutional linkages among academic and research institutes will
also be facilitated to enhance multidisciplinary and transdisciplinary research. This will be
based on careful pre-collaboration analysis of strengths and weaknesses of respective
ministries/departments/institutions and identification of gaps and opportunities that can be
addressed through collaborative efforts. Provisions for social scientific responsibility and
patent pooling will be specified.
10.3.3. A multi-stakeholder collaborative model including government, industry and
academia will be developed based on successful models such as Virtual Integrated Platforms,
City-based and domain-based clusters, Government-Owned Contractor-Operated (GOCO)
etc. This will aid in defining research objectives and aligning priorities with pre-decided time
frames and responsibilities. In addition, strong interlinkage among various facilitating
agencies within the innovation landscape will be encouraged.
10.3.4. Industry-Academia linkages will be further strengthened through the development
of trust-building pathways to pursue collaborative research and translate academic research to
market through institutional support and adequate incentives. Innovative partnership models
will be established to promote partnerships between academia, start-ups and MSME to speed
up the process of commercialization at local levels.
10.3.5. End-user community linkages will be developed and strengthened to ensure last-
mile delivery of S&T-led innovations. Strong interconnection with civil society
organizations, NGOs, charitable organizations, regional and local bodies will be promoted.
55

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
Pathways will be created to enable public-private-civil society consortia in key priority areas
such as connecting farmers and scientists for ensuring access to technology and innovation,
which would enhance agricultural production and increase farmers’ income.
10.3.6. Channels will be created for strategic government departments to partner with
industry and academia to engage in R&D activities in critical areas. Flexible knowledge and
talent exchange models will be developed to facilitate hassle-free collaborations in
strategic areas.
56

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
Chapter 11: STI Policy Governance
11.1. Institutional Mechanism for STI Policy Governance
11.2. Formulating Implementation Strategy and Roadmaps
11.3. Monitoring and Evaluation of STI Policies and Programs
11.4. Policy and Programme Interlinkages
Priority Issues
The success of any policy depends on how it is implemented and governed. There is a critical
need to build a robust STI policy governance system with respect to evidence gathering
through data and policy research, evidence-based policymaking, policy to programme
translation and interconnection, implementation, monitoring, review/assessment, and
feedback. Setting up an institutional mechanism for STI policy research in different sectors
and thereby strengthening the evidence-supported science advice mechanism is one of the
priorities.
Background
STI Policy governance defines and guides the planning, implementation, monitoring and
evaluation of STI policies and programmes. The 5th STI Policy aims to develop and nurture
an effective, transparent, responsible, accountable and self-reliant STI ecosystem. Through
consistent evaluation of the performance of various institutions, policies and programmes,
ensuring the equitable representation of diverse groups and adequate feedback mechanism;
the policy governance will strengthen STI policies and processes. Agile policy governance in
place will respond to emerging challenges, at the sub-national and national level. This
Chapter outlines institutional mechanisms for STI Policy Governance, implementing strategy
and roadmap, monitoring and evaluation of the policy and program and their interlinkages.
11.1. Institutional Mechanism
An STI Policy Institute, with a strong national and international connect, will be established
with a mandate to serve all aspects of STI policy governance. This STI Policy Institute will
be positioned within and governed by the apex-level STI governance institutional
architecture18 and function as a dedicated knowledge support unit to institutionalised
governance mechanisms.
The STI Policy Institute will also provide the knowledge support for other national/sectoral
and sub-national STI planning, coordination, evaluation and capacity building. The
Institution will work closely with existing policy institutions and think tanks, as a hub to
connect, promote and support national and international institutions, in order to strengthen the
18 Refer to STI Governance Institutional Architecture in Chapter 11 Section 11.1
57

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
national STI policy ecosystem. The STI Policy Institution will help to ensure concordance,
harmonisation and linkages of and with STI policies and other national policies and
programmes.
11.1.1 Interoperable STI metadata architecture
One of the primary responsibilities of the STI Policy Institute is to build and maintain a
robust interoperable STI metadata architecture. The metadata includes:
● Inputs such as R&D expenditure, funding pattern, sectoral resource mapping, FTEs
etc.
● Processes such as industry-academic interlinkages, the career trajectory of
researchers, gender balance in STEM, international linkages etc.
● Output such as scientific papers, scholarly proceedings, patents, inventions, skilled
human resources etc.
● Outcome such as technologies, innovations, startups, socio-economic outcomes etc.
11.1.2. Strengthening STI Policy Research
The STI Policy Institute will conduct and promote nationally and internationally relevant STI
policy research, to identify policy gaps and provide evidence for effective policymaking. It
will also work towards expanding policy research in different sectoral and thematic areas.
11.1.3. Strengthening Science Advice Mechanism
Data generates information; policy insights are built upon the information which forms the
evidence base. Science advice mechanism, at sub-national, national and international levels,
will be strengthened by systematically linking the evidence base with the apex-level advisory
and governance mechanisms.
11.1.4. Capacity Development Programmes
The STI Policy Institute will also play a critical role in developing long-term capacity in STI
policy through training and fellowship programmes. The institute will work closely with the
stakeholders including academia, industries, autonomous and independent think tanks and
research and policy institutions in identifying gap areas and will develop tailored capacity
development programmes to build both institutional capacity as well as critical mass of
policy professionals.
11.2. Formulating Implementation Strategy and Roadmaps
Evidence-driven and decentralized approach will be followed in translating policy objectives
into actions through well-structured implementation strategies. The strategy will include
identification of priority areas, implementing agencies, stakeholders and planning the process
58

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
of implementation. Stakeholders are key in formulating implementation strategies and
roadmaps for programme design. The proposed STI Policy Institute will work with, and
provide necessary knowledge support to all the stakeholders and implementing agencies in
developing feasible implementation roadmaps.
11.3. Monitoring and Evaluation of STI Policies and Programmes
Mechanisms will be put in place for continuous monitoring and timely evaluation of policy
and programme implementation. These activities are critical ensuring the policy objectives
are getting translated in the expected direction. Stakeholder feedback and adaptation
mechanisms will be incorporated to fine-tune the policy/programme implementation
strategies. Appropriate exit strategies will also be developed to remove policy instruments
whenever necessary, based on the dynamic evaluation.
11.4. Policy and Programme Interlinkages
Both intra as well as international linkages are required for formulation, implementation and
evaluation of the policies and programmes. At the international front, this will help in
adapting global best practices, standards and in improving the international comparability of
Indian STI data and strengthening India’s position in global rankings and benchmarks. At the
national level, it requires both, inter-ministerial and inter-departmental (horizontal) linkages
as well as inter-state (vertical) linkages for effective implementation of policies and
programs.
11.4.1. Inter-Sectoral Linkages
The existing policies will be interlinked across the sectors by creating systematic synergy
between scientific and socio-economic ministries and departments. By doing so, shared
ownership, equal responsibility and complementaries will be created among various
ministries, departments, funding bodies and implementing agencies. Such interlinkages will
be institutionalized for long-term benefits.
11.4.2 State and Sub-national Linkages
Inter-State Science, Technology and Innovation Council (IS-STIC)19 will be responsible for
aligning national and international STI developments and missions with that of the states. It
will encourage states to provide knowledge support for STI, create a robust STI policy and
advisory mechanism, and facilitate monitoring and evaluation at the state level.
19
Refer to Chapter 11 Section 11.1.2
59

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
Regular interaction between the Centre and the States for STI policy planning will be held.
Such collective and collaborative interactions will help in identifying common problems,
priorities and to formulate and implement policies to address them.
A platform for State S&T administrators will be created for cross learning, and to disseminate
and share good policy practices which can address similar and common problems. Such a
mechanism will be further strengthened to enhance State-level policy implementation and
monitoring processes.
60

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
IV. Implementation Framework
The implementation strategy will be devised through a robust institutional mechanism. The
implementing agencies will be guided by this mechanism in the tasks of landscape analysis,
institutional mapping, identifying stakeholders and resources. Coordinated actions across a
range of actors with proactive leadership and a culture of collaboration across the STI
landscape will be fostered. While identifying and engaging with the stakeholders for STI
policy planning and coordination, indiscriminate representation of experts from science and
social science domains will be ensured.
Once the roadmap for the implementation is developed, the implementing agencies will focus
on capacity building. The STI Policy Institute will provide knowledge support to different
STI departments and agencies, at the centre and the state levels in the training of STI
workforce for implementation and monitoring. The policy and programme milestones will be
set up at the beginning of the implementation by the implementing agency with the guidance
of the STI Policy Institute. From the beginning of the implementation and throughout the
process, systemic communication to generate and share the information and feedback on the
process of implementation will be ensured.
V. Monitoring, Evaluation and Feedback Framework
Digital platforms will be created for monitoring, impact assessment, accounting and other
analyses of STI initiatives. A feedback mechanism will be established between policymakers
and relevant stakeholders after the implementation process begins. Baseline and mid-term
reviews will be conducted and a transparent reporting mechanism for implementing agencies
will be created to ensure regular updating of the policy progress.
Methods such as social assessments through household surveys, focused group discussions,
process tracing, participatory mapping of STI planning and implementation can be used to
monitor and evaluate the policy implementation. Quantitative measurements/indicators-
specific to the policy and/or programme- will be used alongside qualitative measurements to
assess policy impact. Metrics will be created or a Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and
Threats (SWOT) analysis will be conducted to map policy implementation programs, aligned
with bench-marked aspirational outcomes.
VI. Vision
The Science, Technology and Innovation Policy will be guided by the following broad vision;
i) To achieve technological self-reliance and position India among the top three
scientific superpowers in the decade to come.
ii) To attract, nurture, strengthen and retain critical human capital through a ‘people
centric’ science, technology and innovation (STI) ecosystem.
61

Draft STIP Doc 1.4 Dec 2020
iii) To double the number of full-time equivalent (FTE) researchers, Gross Domestic
Expenditure on R&D (GERD) and private sector contribution to the GERD every 5
years.
iv) To build individual and institutional excellence in STI with the aspiration to achieve
the highest level of global recognitions and awards in the coming decade.
v) To capture the aspirations of a new, future-ready India, by ensuring active
participation, shared responsibility and equitable ownership of all stakeholders;
transforming the national STI landscape maintaining the delicate balance between
fortifying India’s indigenous capacity and nurturing meaningful global
interconnectedness.
To capture the aspirations of a new, future-ready India, by ensuring active participation,
shared responsibility and equitable ownership of all stakeholders; transforming the national
STI landscape maintaining the delicate balance between fortifying India’s indigenous
capacity and nurturing meaningful global interconnectedness.
62