

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
SECOND ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS COMMISSION
REPORTS OF THE
ADMINISTRATIVE REFORMS COMMISSION
-A Summary
MAY 2009



Government of India
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances & Pensions
Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances
Resolution
New Delhi, the 31st August, 2005
No. K-II022/9/2004-RC. -The President is pleased to set up a Commission of Inquiry
to be called the Second Administrative Reforms Commission (ARC) to prepare a detailed
blueprint for revamping the public administration system.
2. The Commission will consist of the following:
(i) Shri Veerappa Moily - Chairperson
(ii) Shri V. Ramachandran - Member
(iii) Dr. A.P. Mukherjee - Member
(iv) Dr. A.H. Kalro - Member
(v) Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan - Member
(vi) Smt. Vineeta Rai - Member-Secretary
3. The Commission will suggest measures to achieve a proactive, responsive,
accountable, sustainable and efficient administration for the country at all levels of the
government.
The Commission will, inter alia, consider the following :
(i) Organisational structure of the Government of India
(ii) Ethics in governance
(iii) Refurbishing of Personnel Administration
(iv) Strengthening of Financial Management Systems
(v)
Steps to en ille eifective administration at the State level
(vi) Steps t en ill . e District Administration
(vii)
10 el - TIIllI1 tlPanchaya · Raj Institutions
(viii)
Capital, Trust d Particip public service delivery
(ix)
~'4-~LL tration
...
(x)
e-govern e
'-J.L.L"VLLLIc~
(xi) Issues 0 F era! Poli ~
(xii) Crisis Management
(xiii) Public Order

Some of the issues to be examined under each head are given in the Terms of Reference
attached as a Schedule to this Resolution.
4. The Commission may exclude from its'purview the detailed examination of administration
of Defence, Railways, External Affairs, Security and Intelligence, as also subjects such as
Centre-State relations, judicial reforms etc. which are already being examined by other
bodies. The Commission will, however, be free to take the problems of these sectors into
account in recommending re-organisation of the machinery of the Government or of any
of its service agencies.
5. The Commission will give due consideration to the need for consultation with the State
Governments.
6. The Commission will devise its own procedures (including for consultations with the
State Government as may be considered appropriate by the Commission), and may appoint
committees, consultants/advisers to assist it. The Commission may take into account the
existing material and reports available on the subject and consider building upon the same
rather than attempting to address all the issues ab initio.
7. The Ministries and Departments of the Government of India will furnish such information
and documents and provide other assistance as may be required by the Commission. The
Government of India trusts that the State Governments and all others concerned will extend
their fullest cooperation and assistance to the Commission.
8. The Commission will furnish its report(s) to the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances
& Pensions, Government of India, within one year of its constitution.
Sd/
(P.I. Suvrathan)
Mditional Secretary to Government of India

ORGANISATION
Second Administrative Reforms Commission
1. Dr. M.Veerappa Moily, Chairman*
2. Shri V. Ramachandran, Member**
3. Dr. A.P. Mukherjee, Member
4. Dr. A.H. Kalro, Member
5. Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan, Member***
6. Smt. Vineeta Rai, Member-Secretary
Officers of the Commission
1. Shri Anil Bhushan Prasad, Additional Secretary
2. Shri P.S. Kharola, Joint Secretary#
3. Shri R.K. Singh, PS to Chairman#
4. Shri Sanjeev Kumar, Director
5. Shri Shahi Sanjay Kumar, Deputy Secretary
*D r. M Veeerappa Moily - Chairman, resigned with effect from 1st April, 2009
(Resolution No.K-ii 022/2~/2007-AR, dated 1st April 2009)
**Shri V Ramachandran was appointed Acting Chairman
(Resolution No. K-II022/26/2007-AR, dated 27th April 2009)
***Dr. Jayaprakash Narayan - Member, resigned with effect from 1st September, 2007
(Resolution No.K-11 022/26/2007-AR, dated 17th August, 2007)
# Till 31. 03.2009
Consultant for Summary Report - Shri Lalit Sharma, lAS (Retd.)
iii
L

CONTENTS
Foreword 1
Chapter 1 Right to Information 5
- Master Key to Good Governance
Chapter 2 Unlocking Human Capital: Entitlements and Governance 18
- A Case Study
Chapter 3 Crisis Management 48
- From Despair to Hope
Chapter 4 Ethics in Governance 76
Chapter 5 Public Order 102
- Justice for each. . . Peace for all
Chapter 6 Local Governance 136
- An Inspiring Journey into the Future
Chapter 7 Capacity Building for Conflict Resolution 192
- Friction to Fusion
Chapter 8 Combatting Terrorism 227
- Protecting by Righteousness
Chapter 9 Social Capital 238
- A Shared Destiny
Chapter 10 Refurbishing of Personnel Administration 270
- Scaling New Heights
Chapter 11 Promoting e-Governance 305
- The SMART way Forward
Chapter 12 Citizen Centric Administration 325
- The Heart of Governance
iv
I .
ca

Chapter 13 Organisational Structure of Government of India 347
Chapter 14 Strengthening Financial Management Systems 377
Chapter 15 State and District Administration 412
Summary of Recommendations of all Reports 488
v
*For full form of the Abbreviations, the main Reports may be referred.

FOREWORD
"In Governance is realized all the forms ofr enunciation; in Governance is combined all
knowledge; in Governance is centered all the Worlds. "
- The Mahabharata
1. In the last quarter century India has changed substantially. The liberalization of the
economy has pushed up growth rates. The improved tax to GDP ratio has enabled the
Government to undertake ambitious programmes of nation building which have brought
down poverty levels. The third tier of governance - local self governments - has been
created, augmenting the electoral content of Indian democracy. On the other hand income
disparities have grown, all regions have not progressed equally, and major conflicts remain
unresolved. The ripples created by these developments have set in motion great changes in
the manner in which government is perceived by the citizen, the expectations of the citizen
from the Government, and the manner in which government functions.
2. The administrative system has tried to adapt to the different demands made by these
changes. A comprehensive examination of the system had not been undertaken since the
First Administrative Reforms Commission in 1966. Feeling the need for a holistic review the
government appointed the Second Administrative Reforms Commission in August 2005 with
a wide mandate to revamp the public administrative system and suggest measures to achieve
an ethical, responsive, accountable, sustainable and efficient administration at all levels.
3. The Commission has presented its recommendations in 15 Reports. In arriving at these
recommendations the Commission had wide consultation across all sections of society.
It also drew upon the experience and expertise of eminent persons and institutions, and
studied the best practices, in the relevant fields, nationally and internationally.
4. For the sake of convenience the 15 reports of the Commission have been summarized in
this one volume, and all the recommendations appended. The Commission hopes that it will
be found useful. For those interested in the detailed reasoning behind the recommendations,
the full reports are available.
•

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
5. The quest for good governance, that is, a governance which is efficient and citizen centric
and is rooted in a sound value system, is based on three inter-related fundamental ideas.
The first is rule of law. Rule of law requires that laws and their implementation should
be transparent, predictable and credible, and that those who make and implement laws
should be accountable for their decisions. While the government of the day is accountable
to the legislature, at the operating levels of administration this accountability is often
lacking. A steady pulse in the recommendations of the Commission is thus the emphasis
on accountability at each level of administration and minimization of unfettered discretion
in decision making. From accountability of decision making flows credibility, predictability
and transparency.
6. The second fundamental idea has been to put the citizen first. All too often the
relationship between the State and the citizen is a master-client relationship, with the
citizen reduced to the status of a supplicant. This has to go. Systemic changes along with
information technology makes it possible to reduce, if not eliminate altogether, the time
and trouble involved in the citizen's contact with the State. It also makes it possible to
introduce automaticity in decision making. The State has to look upon itself as a service
provider, and, as in many cases the State is a natural monopoly, the Commission has made
a
number of recommendations to curtail monopolistic behaviour by State agencies. Most
important, however, is the citizen's participation in decision making. In our scheme of
things the Union Government being the furthest removed from the day-to-day life of the
citizen represents the principle of rationality. The State Governments, because of the sheer
size of constituencies also tends to be removed from the daily concerns of the citizen. It is
the third tier of governance, the panchayats and the municipal bodies, which is the closest
to the citizen and can represent the principle of concern. Hence, it is necessary that there is
greater devolution of powers, from the Union to the State Governments and from the State
Governments to local bodies, and that the local bodies function in appropriate units that
allow participation of every citizen in decision making. This devolution will not weaken
either the Union or the States: in fact it will strengthen them by enabling them to focus
on matters they are uniquely equipped to address.
7. India is a republic based on the idea of "Right" . The Ashoka Chakra in our flag symbolizes
it and various provisions of the Constitution exemplify it. Our system of governance and
administration has, of necessity, to be based upon strong ethical foundations. India is
blessed with a richness of diverse communities, but conflicts often arise. Friction has to be
reduced, and where conflicts do arise, they have to be settled fairly. Indian democracy has
had success in resolving highly emotive issues (such as language, State boundaries etc.) in
the past. The Commission has tried to draw lessons from our history, and made appropriate
suggestions on conflict resolution. In governance there is an interface between the political
•

Foreword
and administrative processes. Politics is a competitive activity and all political parties need to
introspect periodically and draw lines that are not to be crossed. The conduct of ministers,
the relationship between ministers and civil servants, and the conduct of public servants
vis-a-vis citizens need to be governed by an ethical code. The Commission has addressed
these issues in its Report on "Ethics in Governance".
8. Administrative decisions are not made in a political vacuum. Political direction of
the administration is the essence of democracy. The 73rd and 74th amendments to
the Constitution have expanded the scope of political decision making. This casts a
great responsibility on the political parties, to educate and train their functionaries in
administrative decision making. Power entails responsibility, and accountability of decision
makers has been a persistent concern of the Commission.
9. Every State has its 'establishment', which is usually its civil service. From 1858 onwards
the civil services have provided the 'establishment' of the Indian State, often through difficult
and trying times. The structured merit-based recruitment and placement of civil servants in
different cadres was seen as one of the methods of unifying the country after Independence.
Today there is considerable managerial talent available outside the civil services. Ministers can
draw upon a very large base of intellectual expertise, often not available in the Government.
The Commission has made sev"eral suggestions to achieve the purposes of nurturing talent
for the 'establishment' of the Indian State from an early age, sustaining their morale and
skills, upgrading the Services throughout their career and the induction of fresh talent at
appropriate stages.
10. Efficient discharge of government business is hampered by horizontal and vertical
dispersal of decision making. Single, or strongly related subjects are often administered in
different ministries. The resultant narrow focus of Ministries entail that coherent points
of view, or policy, emerges only after extensive and prolonged consultations. Such delay
could be avoided by having Ministries that can take a holistic view of the subject. This
would also result in governments which are more compact and in which coordination is
quicker and easier.
11. In the existing government structure issues are examined at too many levels, and the
contribution of some of them is minimal. These levels need to be reduced to a rational
number. The Commission has made suggestions regarding the internal working of ministries
and departments. The Commission has also recommeI?-ded creation of effective Executive
Agencies with well defined role and functions. This would facilitate the Ministries to focus
more on policy making and analysis while the projects/programmes are implemented by
the Executive Agencies.
•

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
12. Budgeting and Audit are critically important tools of governance. The mis-match
between plan and budget classifications needs to be ironed out to permit rigorous monitoring
of expenditure. An expert group needs to look at accrual based budgeting. Ministries need
to be realistic in making their estimates of expenditure so that large unspent balances do
not remain at the end of the year. A multi-year perspective would be helpful in this.
(b) Audit is often seen as an adversarial exercise, which it need not be. While Auditors
have to be sensitive to administrative compulsions, Ministries and Departments need to
understand that audit is an instrument for increasing their administrative efficiency and
rectitude. There is therefore need for better understanding and synergy between the audit
and auditees for enhanced public accountability and better audit impact.
13. Most of the recommendations of the Commission impinge upon State Governments.
The principles underlying reforms in the Union Government are also applicable to State
Governments. One area of change in governance is the administration of districts. The
Commission has suggested a dual role for the District Administration (headed by the District
Magistrate) - the first as the secretariat and executive in District Councils and secondly as
an agency of the State Government.
(b) The Union Territories need greater delegation of financial and administrative
powers. The Government of Delhi should have a greater say particularly in
the management of land and policing. The Union Territories require a long
term road map to be laid out for them. These other important issues have been
comprehensively discussed and recommendations made by the Commission
in its Report on 'State and District Administration'.
(c) Bringing about peace in the North East is a necessary condition for rapid
development of this strategically important region. Personnel policies need
to be tuned to the needs of the region and key institutions strengthened.
An evaluation of the results of special provisions such as the Sixth Schedule
Councils would be useful in determining the contours of their future.
14. The recommendations of the Commission fall into two groups. The first is the set of
changes which need to be made in administrative structures, processes and techniques.
The second is a work programme in which a number of issues need to be examined by the
Government. Implementing the suggested changes and carrying out the work programmes
will require strong political will and sustained political guidance at the highest level. The
Commission is confident that both will be forthcoming .
•

RIGHT TO INFORMATION
- Master Key To Good Governance
Introduction
In a fundamental sense, right to information is a basic necessity of good governance.
Recognizing the need for transparency in public affairs, Parliament enacted the Right to
Information Act (RTI Act) in 2005.
This law is very comprehensive and covers almost all matters of governance and has the
widest possible reach, being applicable to government at all levels - Union, State and Local
as well as recipients of government grants. Access to information under this Act is extensive
with minimum exemptions. Even these exemptions are subject to strict safeguards.
While the Act applies to all branches of government - Executive, Legislative and Judicial,
the Commission's study and recommendations largely pertain to the Executive branch at all
levels. However, the Commission has also carefully examined some of the key issues which
need to be addressed in the Legislative and Judicial branches for effective implementation
of the Act.
The Report is in two parts: Part I focusses on Official Secrets and confidentiality issues and
Part II focuses on the steps required for effective implementation of the Act.
Part I - OFFICIAL SECRETS
OFFICIAL SECRETS ACT AND OTHER LAWS
Background
The Official Secrets Act, 1923 (OSA) largely deals with matters of security and provides a
framework for dealing with espionage, sedition and other assaults on the unity and integrity
of the nation. While Section 5 of OSA was obviously intended to deal with potential
breaches of national security, the wording of the law and the colonial times in which it was
implemented made it into a catch-all legal provision converting practically every issue of
governance into a confidential matter. This tendency was buttressed by the Civil Service
•
Conduct Rules, 1964 which prohibit communication of an official document to anyone

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
without authorization. Also, Section 123 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, prohibits the
giving of evidence from unpublished official records without the permission of the Head
of the Department.
The Official Secrets Act
Though OSA would not come in the way of disclosure of information if it is otherwise
permissible under the RTI Act, but OSA along with other rules and instructions may
impinge on the regime of freedom of information as they historically nurtured a culture of
secrecy and non-disclosure, which is against the spirit of the Right to Information Act.
Section 5 of OSA, as interpreted judicially, bans the disclosure of even information which
does not have a bearing on national security if the public servant obtained or has access to
it by virtue of holding office. Though the RTI Act now overrides these provisions in relation
to matters not exempted by the Act itself from disclosure, the fact remains that OSA in its
current form in the statute books is an anachronism.
The Law Commission in its 43rd Report (1971), summarised the difficulties encountered
with the all inclusive nature of Section 5 of OSA, in the absence of a clear and concise
definition of 'official secret', in the following words:
The Law Commission also recommended consolidation of all laws dealing with national
security and suggested a "National Security Bill".
The Commission agrees with the Law Commission that all laws relating to national security
should be consolidated. A new chapter needs to be added to the NSA incorporating relevant
provisions of OSA an~ other laws dealing with national security.
The Commission studied the Report of the Working Group constituted under the
Chairmanship of Shri H. D. Shourie on "Right to Information and Transparency, 1997"
(,Shourie Committee').
The Shourie Committee recommended a comprehensive amendment of Section 5(1)
to make the penal provisions of OSA applicable only to violations affecting national
security. However the Ministry of Home Affairs, on consultation expressed the view that
there is no need to amend OSA as the RTI Act has overriding effect. The Ministry, quite
understandably, is concerned about the need for a strong legal framework to deal with
offences against the state. While recognizing the importance of keeping certain information
secret in national interest, the Commission is of the view that the disclosure of information
• has to be the norm and keeping it secret should be an exception. OSA, in its present form

Right to Information - Master Key to Good Governance
is an obstacle for creation of a regime of freedom of information. The Commission, on
careful consideration agrees with the amendment proposed by the Shourie Committee, as it
reconciles harmoniously the need for transparency and the imperatives of national security
without in anyway compromising the latter.
When there is more than one law on the same subject, there is always some ambiguity
and consequent confusion. Despite 'implied repeal' and provisions like 'notwithstanding
anything contained in any other law' the old subordinate legislation, notifications and
executive instructions continue unaltered and govern actual implementation. In order to
send a strong signal about the change and for the sake of effective implementation, the
old law/s should be repealed or modified to the extent necessary. Basic change and lazy
legislation do not go together.
Governmental Privilege in Evidence:
The term "privilege" as used in Evidence law means freedom from compulsion to give
evidence or to discover material, or a right to prevent or bar information from other
sources during or in connection with litigation, but on grounds extrinsic to the goals of
litigation. Section 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1972, which govern privilege,
were examined by the Law Commission in its 69th and 88th reports, and by the Shourie
Committee.
The Commission studied the recommendations of the Law Commission reports and the
Shourie Committee and is of the view that the existing provisions need amendment to limit
privilege to the exemptions under the RTI Act, and even that privilege should be subject
to judicial satisfaction.
The Oath ofS ecrecy:
Ministers, while assuming office, are administered an oath of secrecy.
The National Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution (NCRWC), while
examining the Right to Information had suggested an each oath of transparency in place
of the oath of secrecy.
National security and larger public interest considerations of the country's integrity and
sovereignty may require a Minister with sufficient justification not to disclose information.
But a very public oath of secrecy at the time of assumption of office is both unnecessary and
repugnant to the principles of democratic accountability. Therefore, the obligation not to
disclose official secrets may be built in through an appropriate insertion of a clause in the •
, I

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
national security law dealing with official secrets. If required, such an undertaking may be
taken in writing, thus avoiding public display of propensity to secrecy. The Commission
is therefore of the view that the Oath of Secrecy may be dispensed with and substituted
by a statutory arrangement and a written undertaking. Further, keeping in view the spirit
of the Act to promote transparency and as recommended by the NCRWC it would be
appropriate if Ministers on assumption of office are administered an oath of transparency
alongwith the oath of office.
Exempted Organizations
Certain categories of organizations have been exempted from the provisions of the Act.
The list of organizations includes Border Security Force (BSF), Central Reserve Police
force (CRPF), Assam Rifles etc., but the Armed Forces have been left outside the purview
of exemptions.
The Commission feels that the Armed Forces should be included in the list of exempted
organization (Second Schedule of the Act), because almost all activities of the Armed Forces
would be covered under the exemption 8(a) which states that there shall be no obligation
to give to any citizen, information which would prejudicially affect the sovereignty and
integrity of India, the security, strategic, scientific or economic interests of the State ...... ".
The Commission is mindful of the fact that the Act provides for disclosure when allegations
of corruption and human rights abuses are made even in respect of the organizations
included in the Second Schedule {Section 24 (l)}. Also, Section 8 (2) makes disclosure
mandatory in respect of exempted categories, if public interest in disclosure outweighs
the harm to the protected interests. Therefore, by including Armed Forces in the Second
Schedule, while national security is safeguarded, disclosure is still mandatory when public
interest demands it.
Section 24 oft he Act stipulates
Provided that the information pertaining to the allegations of corruption and human rights
violations shall not be excluded under this sub-section:
The organizations included in the Second Schedule need not appoint PIOs. A question
arises that in case of request for information pertaining to allegations of corruption and
human rights violation, how should a request be made? The Commission feels that even
in cases of organizations listed in Second Schedule, PIO s should be appointed so that
requests for applications may be filed with them. A person aggrieved by an order of the
PIO may approach the CIC/SIC .
•

Right to Information - Master Key to Good Governance
RULES AND PROCEDURES
The Central Civil Services (Conduct) Rules
The Central Civil Services (Conduct) Rules prohibit unauthorized communication of
information (similar provisions exist for the state government employees under their
respective Rules).
These had been examined by the Shourie Committee and the Commission agrees with
the views of the Shourie Committee. The Central Civil Services (Conduct) Rules were
formulated when the RTI Act did not exist. The spirit of these Rules is to hold back
information. These Rules would have to be recaSt so that dissemination of information is
the rule and holding back information is an exception. The Department of Personnel and
Training has amended the Civil Services (Conduct) Rules on these lines in Oct. 2005.
However all States need to amend rules in a similar manner in keeping with the letter and
spirit ofRTI Act.
The Manual ofO ffice Procedure
Some portions of the Manual are in conflict with the RTI Act.
The Manual was prepared when the RTI Act was not in existence. Provisions violative of
the Act need to be brought in conformity with the Act. Notings and files per se will not
become confidential and inaccessible unless they are classified as such and are declared to
be covered under exemption provisions of Section 8(1) of the Act. To bring it in conformity
with the Act, the provisions regarding unauthorized communication of official information
and confidential character of notes / files will have to be amended.
CONFIDENTIALITY CLASSIFICATION
"'lassification ofI nformation
ajor contributor to the culture of secrecy in the government is the tendency to classify
-mation even where such classification is clearly unwarranted.
je Committee had considered the issue of classification of information and
~%at only information exempt from disclosure under the Information Act should
~
Q) •
respects the need to keep certain information outside the public
•

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Only officers of sufficient seniority should be empowered to classify documents. And such
classified documents should be reviewed after a reasonable period of, say 30 years (less in
case of some documents).
Further, the hierarchy of security classification needs to be rationalised, reflecting the scheme
of exemptions under the Act and emerging challenges. The Act has listed 11 categories
(section 8 and 9) of exemption wherein information may not be given out. These range from
"information, disclosure of which would prejudicially affect the sovereignty and integrity
of India, the security, strategic, scientific or. economic interests of the State, relation with
foreign State or lead to incitement of an offence; to "infringement of copyright subsisting
in a person". The Commission feels that the classification system should broadly cover
each of these categories of information. It is quite possible that an information falls under
two or more categories of exemptions. In that case the information should be given the
classification of the higher order among the exemptions.
Although the 11 categories of information are fairly exhaustive and cover almost all possible
situations for keeping information secret, some situations which demand secrecy seem to
remain out of these exemptions like confidential reports of officials, and question papers
of examinations. The Commission feels that information in these cases should also be
covered by exemptions.
Part-II - IMPLEMENTATION OF THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT
RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS
Rights and Obligations Under the Act
In order to enforce the rights and fulfil the obligations under the Act, building ofinstitutions,
organization of information and creation of an enabling environment are critical.
I. BUILDING INSTITUTIONS:
a. Information Commissions
b. Information Officers and Appellate Authorities.
II. INFORMATION AND RECORD-KEEPING:
a. Suo motu declaration under Section 4.
•
b. Public Interest Disclosure .

Right to Information - Master Key to Good Governance
c. Modernizing recordkeeping.
III. CAPACITY BUILDING AND AWARENESS GENERATION:
IV. CREATION OF MONITORING MECHANISMS:
Building Institutions
The Act provides for selection of the CIC and SICs in a bipartisan manner, and involves
the Leader of the Opposition in the process. Since the Act is applicable to all three organs
of the State, it would be appropriate to include in the selection committee the ChiefJ ustice
of the Supreme Court or High Court as the case may be.
The Act allows for dispersal of Information Commissions to provide easy access to citizens.
The Commission is therefore of the view that the CI C should be dispersed in atleast 4
regions. Similarly the SICs in larger States should be dispersed depending on population
density and geographical area.
An analysis of the background of the State Chief Information Commissioners indicates
the preponderance of persons with civil service background. Members with civil services
background no doubt bring with them wide experience. But to inspire public confidence,
it is desirable that the Commissions have a large proportion of members with non civil
services background.
Designating Information Officers and Appellate Authorities
There is a wide variation in the numbers of PIOs appointed, and the level of officers
appointed. Where more than one PIO is appointed it is desirable to designate a
nodal PIO.
The level of PI Os varies from Joint Secretary to Under Secretary. To reconcile responsibility
and accessibility the Commission is of the view that in GOI there should be a uniform
pattern of appointing an officer of the rank of Deputy Secretary/Director as PIO. The
principle enunciated above may be adopted while designating PIOs in attached and
subordinate offices and the State Governments.
There is avoidable confusion about the identification of appellate authorities. While PI Os
are invariably notified, this is not the case with appellate authorities. This omission needs
to be rectified.
II

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Organising Information and Record Keeping
Suo Moto Disclosure
The Act emphasises suo motu disclosure, and stipulates publication of prescribed information
by all public authorities. A sample study shows that these are often perfunctory and lacking
in substance.
Even when the suo motu disclosure is of an acceptable quality the question of its access still
remains. While the present practice of web publication should continue the vast majority
of people will not have access to computers in the foreseeable future. Also a large number
of small public offices and village panchayats are unlikely to be able to use this mode of
communication. Therefore, a printed priced publication in the local language, revised
periodically (at least once a year) should be available in each public office and supplied
on demand. In respect of electronic disclosures, it is necessary to provide a single portal
through which disclosures of all public authorities under appropriate governments could
be accessed.
Perhaps the weakest link in our information system is the total neglect of record keeping.
The Tenth Finance Commission took note of it and recommended special grants to the
States for improving record keeping. Land records are probably among the most important
public documents in any governance system. A one-,time effort to update all land records,
and ensure proper storage and retrieval is necessary.
Right to Information would be honoured only if the information exists and when it exists,
it is easily retrievable and intelligible. A combination of measures is required to achieve
this: record keeping procedures need to be developed, reviewed and revised; catalouging,
indexing and orderly storage should be mandatory; all documents need to be converted
into rational, intelligible, retrievable information modules. A road map needs to be made
for digitizing of records.
A permanent mechanism with sufficient authority, expertise and responsibility needs to be
created in each government to coordinate and supervise proper record-keeping. Therefore
an independent Public Records Office (PRO) should be established in GOI and in each
State Government.
The Public Records Office would have responsibility to oversee proper record keeping in
all public offices and function under the overall guidance and supervision of CIC or SIC,
as the case may be.
II

Right to Information - Master Key to Good Governance
Adequate funding needs to be assured for these agencies. As a one-time measure, the GOI
may allocate one per cent (1 %) of funds of the 'Flagship Programmes' for a period of five
years for improving the infrastructure, creating manuals, providing technical support and
establishing Public Records Offices.
Capacity Building and Awareness Generation
Training programmes: The mindset of the government functionaries, wherein secrecy is the
norm and disclosure the exception, would require a revolutionary change. Such a change
would also be required in the mindset of citizens who traditionally have been reluctant to
seek information. Bringing about this radical change would require sustained training and
awareness generation programmes.
Awareness generation: In order to achieve the objectives of the Act it would be necessary
that citizens become aware of their entitlements and the processes required to use this right
to improve the quality of governance. An effective awareness generation campaign should
involve multi media efforts including street plays, television spots, radio jingles, and other
mass communication techniques.
J
Section 26 of the Act states that the appropri~te government may develop and organize
educational programmes to advance the understanding of the public, in particular of
disadvantaged communities as to how to exercise the rights contemplated under the Act.
It has also been mandated that the appropriate governments shall within 18 months from
the commencement of the Act, compile a guide containing such information in a simple
and comprehensible manner. The Commission feels that this should be done at the earliest
as non-availability of such guide is proving to be a hurdle in generation of awareness about
the Act.
Monitoring Mechanism
A strong monitoring mechanism is a basic necessity for ensuring successful implementation
of the Act. This monitoring should be done at several levels - within the public authority,
for a group of authorities in a territory, for a whole state and the country. Normally, for
each department/agency, the head of the organization will be responsible for monitoring.
A question arises as to which agency should be at the apex of the monitoring process.
Under the law the functions ofCIC and SICs are largely limited to hearing complaints and
appeals, and submitting annual reports. When an independent, full time authority. exists
under the Act it would be most appropriate to entrust it with the important responsibility
of monitoring the implementation of the Act.
II

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
It would be advisable in public interest if all the Information Commissions can share
perspectives and experiences. This would avoid dupiication of efforts, minimize litigation
and ensure uniform application of the Act throughout the country. The CIC would be the
ideal institution to head such a coordinating agency.
ISSUES IN IMPLEMENTATION
Implementation oft he Act
The implementation of the RTI Act has thrown up various structural, procedural and
logistical issues.
Complicated system of accepting requests: While accepting applications, Departments insist
that cash be paid at the accounts office which are often at different locations.
Many field offices do not have provision to collect cash. Therefore, the process of filing
requests for information needs to be simplified.
Insistence on demand drafts: Though there is a provision to pay fees through bank drafts,
as the bank charges Rs 35 to prepare a demand draft of Rs.l O. Therefore the insistence by
some departments to receive fees only through demand drafts and not in cash needs to be
dispensed with. A mechanism to ease payments for postal requests is also needed.
Inventory ofP ublic Authorities
Listing public authorities is a Herculean task. An inverted tree concept could be followed to
have an inventory of all public authorities. Starting from Ministries of GOI, each Ministry
should have details of all public authorities immediately under its control. Similarly each
public authority should have an exhaustive list of agencies and offices under its immediate
control, till the lowest public authority in the hierarchy is reached.
Single Window Agenry at District Level
Presently almost all departments and agencies of the State Government are represented
at the District level, but these offices are often dispersed. Therefore it is necessary to have
a Single Window Agency, which could receive requests for information on behalf of the
public authorities/PI Os which have jurisdiction over the district and then forward them
to the respective public authority/PIO.
III

Right to Information - Master Key to Good Governance
Subordinate Field Offices and Public Authorities
The experience so far suggests that lower tiers of the Government have neither been
considered as Public Authorities nor have PI Os been designated. According to the definition
in the Act, lower tiers of field formations should be treated as Public Authorities. While
these tiers of administration may be appointed as APIOs by the higher authorities of their
respective organizations, these tiers per se would also qualify as Public Authorities for their
own internal functioning. This would in turn cast on them the responsibility of making
suo motu disclosure of information. Since the intention of the Act is to reach a stage where
suo motu disclosure of information by institutions in itself takes care of citizens' need for
information. Therefore public authorities at the lower end of the administrative and/or
functional hierarchies need to be identified to discharge responsibilities under Section 4
of the Act.
Application to Non Governmental Bodies
Under the Act, a non-governmental body needs to be substantially financed by government
to be categorized as a public authority under the Act. There is however no definition of
"substantially financed."
In the wake of outsourcing of functions which traditionally were performed by government
agencies, it is desirable that institutions that enjoy a natural monopoly, or whose functions
impinge on citizens' lives substantially, must come under the provisions of the RTI Act. Also
it may be desirable to define what 'substantially financed' would mean, otherwise different .
authorities may interpret this in different ways.
Time Limit for Information Beyond 20 Years
RTI Act stipulates that information on any went that happened twenty years ago shall be
provided to any applicant.
"(3) Subject to the provisions of clauses (a), (c) and (i) of sub-section 0), any
information relating to any occurrence, event or matter which has taken place, occured
or happened twenty years before the date on which any request is made under section
6 shall be provided to any person making a request under that section:"
There is a significant percentage of records which is permanent in nature. On the other
hand most public records are not maintained for 20 years.
II

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
The need for harmony between the record keeping procedures and the stipulations under
the Act is obvious.
Mechanism for Redressal ofP ublic Grievances
In a large number of cases information sought to be accessed stems from a grievance against
a department/ agency.
Experience has shown that functionaries/departments tend to be defensive rather than
proactive in redressing a grievance (or even in disclosing information) particularly when
it directly pertains to their conduct (or misconduct). This underlines the need for an
independent forum to hear complaints into acts of omission and commission, harassment,
corruption etc. which emerge either through information collected under the Right to
Information Act or otherwise.
Frivolous and Vexatious Requests
Instances have been brought to the notice of the Commission in which the requests were
patently frivolous or vexatious (or mala fide). The Commission therefore feels that adequate
safeguards should be provided against vexatious and malicious requests, even as no fetters
are imposed on citizens seeking information in accordance with the letter and spirit of
section 6(2).
There may be cases where the efforts in compiling information may not be commensurate
with the results achieved. Even in case of Parliament there is a stipulation that a question
which clearly relates to day-to-day administration and asks for collection of facts pertaining
to the Ministries entailing prolonged labour and time not commensurate with results
achieved is ordinarily disallowed. The Commission feels that requests for information,
the collection and compilation of which would require effort not commensurate with the
output may be disallowed subject to the safeguard of scrutiny by a higher authority.
APPLICATION OF THE ACT TO THE LEGISLATURE AND THE JUDICIARY
Most of the observations and recommendations of the Commission in this Report apply
largely to the Executive branch of government. The Legislature and Judiciary are also
covered by the Act.
The Legislatures and the Judiciary in India already operate within the public eye to a far
greater extent than the Executive. The meetings of Legislative Committees, however are
generally not open to the public and media. Similarly, all judicial processes are in the public

Right to Information - Master Key to Good Governance
domain and hence totally transparent. But administrative processes within the courts would
have to be brought within the ambit of this law.
Legislatures are storehouses of enormous amount of dis aggregated information on public
policies and executive actions. However, there are two problems. All information with the
legislatures needs to be indexed, catalogued and computerised, with online access to all
citizens and supply on demand. This access should be provided as part of the proactive
disclosure requirement under Section 4 of the Act.
Parliamentary (Legislative) questions, proceedings of various committees, follow up action
on the reports of CAG, action taken reports submitted by the government are a few vital
mechanisms for legislative oversight. All such information needs to be made available to
the public both online (electronic) and on demand (print).
In most democracies, a major part of the legislative work is conducted in Committees.
However, the work of legislative committees in India has generally been away from the
public and media gaze. Bipartisan consensus and balanced consideration of issues is the
hallmark of a Committee's work. There could be the risk of this advantage being jeopardised
by throwing open the Committee's work to public and media.
The Commission has carefully examined these competing considerations. It is of the
considered view that on balance the dictates of democracy and transparency should prevail.
The legislative parties should evolve a consensus in order to retain the best features of the
Committee system even as the work of Committees is opened to public gaze.
A prerequisite for making the administrative processes in the district and the subordinate
courts totally transparent is their computerisation. This is necessitated because of the sheer
volume of records handled. Furthermore, the records of these courts require scientific
storage, indexing and cataloguing thereby facilitating easy access.
II
..J,b,.1

UNLOCKING HUMAN CAPITAL
Entitlements and Governance - a case study
, Introduction
"The measure of a country's greatness should be based on how well it cares for its most
vulnerable populations'~
- Mahatma Gandhi
There is a shift in Government's approach towards development. Instead of relying only
on increase in general affluence to enhance the living standards of citizens, the approach
is to consider the acquisition of minimum levels of education, health, employment and
nutrition as basic entitlements, and recognize the key role of the state in providing them
to every needy citizen in the country. In essence, the shift is towards universalization and
entitlements.
To this end there are seven flagship programmes, namely, Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan, Mid
day Meal Scheme, Drinking Water Mission, Total Sanitation Campaign, National Rural
Health Mission, Integrated Child Development Services, and National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme.
Of the seven flagship programmes, the Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme under the
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (hereinafter referred to as NREGA or simply
(the Act') is certainly the largest.
Hence, ARC undertook a study of strengthening of administrative and financial management
systems for effective implementation of NREGA. It has identified issues and constraints
and has suggested solutions and made recommendations .
. REVIEW OF PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT PROGRAMMES
Wage Employment Programmes in the Past
Evaluations ofp revious wage employment programmes, reveal
III
I~

Unlocking Human Capital: Entitlements and Governance - a case study
• Funds were not utilized in full.
• Coverage of villages and the target group was extremely low.
• A large part of the funds was used less in labour intensive activities and more in
capital intensive activities.
• Majority of beneficiaries received less than 30 days of wage employment in a
year.
• There was bogus reporting to achieve targets.
• These programmes created income for the rural poor but left very few durable
assets.
• The programmes encouraged corruption, both at political and administrative
levels.
• Fudging of muster rolls and measurement books was common and resulted
in loss of funds that could have been otherwise invested in creation of rural
infrastructure.
• Participation of women was lower than the stipulated norm of 30 per cent.
• In most cases, contractors were involved and the use of machinery was also reported,
though the schemes expressly forbade it.
Employment Guarantee Scheme
Evaluations of the Employment Guarantee Scheme (EGS) started in Maharashtra in the
early 1970s, show
• The programme continues after 30 years without any decrease in demand for
unskilled wage work
• Modest impact on poverty reduction and on unemployment reduction
• Distress migration of workers from backward region continues
• Quality of the assets created and their maintenance is not satisfactory

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
• Failure to adopt a local development policy to promote overall area
development
Lessons
Inadequate Planningfor Assets
Inadequate planning and serious flaws in project selection had adverse impact on the
productivity and quality of the physical capital created.
Lack ofP eople's Participation
In the absence of people's participation, the bureaucracy dominated the process of planning
and implementation, with the result that the approach was technocratic and top-down.
Limited Role ofP anchayats
The involvement of Panchayats strengthened the planning and implementation of the
employment schemes wherever they were associated. This highlights the need for giving a
greater role to the Panchayats in the implementation of wage employment programmes.
Lack of Capability
Very few elected Panchayat chiefs and other functionaries were given training.
Focus on Physical Work
The earlier employment generation programmes/schemes, inherited from the colonial relics
of famine relief works, focused on physical work. The knowledge based rural economy was
des toyed in the colonial era. There is a need to redefine employment programmes through
an appropriate use of knowledge and skills in the works.
Leakages
Leakages were a common feature in the implementation of employment programmes. In
most cases, contractors were involved.
II

Unlocking Human Capital: Entitlements and Governance - a case study
NATIONAL RURAL EMPLOYMENT GUARANTEE ACT - IMPLEMENTATION
CHALLENGES
Salient Features of the Act
The National Rural Employment Guarantee Act guarantees assured employment for hundred " "
4
days to a rural household. It makes employment an enforceable right.
Shift towards Universalization and Entidements
Guaranteeing Reach
The distinguishing feature of NREGA is that it provides a time bound legal guarantee to
all households in need of employment. There is need for understanding of region specific
labour demand and its seasonality so that demand based projects can be implemented at a
frequency that matches the demand for work instead of supply side provisioning.
Guaranteeing Outcome
The outcome envisaged is the provision of livelihood security to the rural poor in the short
,.i;
term by providing guaranteed employment on a universal scale and asset creation through J.
-the process of employment to generate infrastructure for poverty alleviation on a permanent . i. '
basis. This would call for a monitoring mechanism by strengthening institutional structures
at the level of the local government.
Ensuring Convergence
It is necessary to integrate the implementation of NREGA with the implementation of
other flagship development initiatives and achieve convergence.
Method ofE xpansion
The expansion in the coverage of the Scheme should be both need-based and demand-based.
Because of different levels of development within blocks the district may not be the ideal
unit for implementation under this Scheme.
I
I

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Gender Balance
Gender balance in the implementation of NREGA is important because of the twin
considerations of casualisation of labour and feminization of poverty.
Union Funding and Execution by State Governments
Fund Flow
The NREGA is mainly funded by the Union Government. As it is a demand based
provisioning, flow of funds from the Union Government to the local government needs
to be ensured according to the demand.
Accountability
Because of the duality in respect of funding and execution, it is possible that accountability
could get blurred. It is, therefore, necessary to delineate the accountability mechanisms in
clear and unambiguous terms.
Moral Hazards and Distorted Incentives
The funding and executing agencies being different, there is a likelihood that incentives
may be distorted leading to use of resources in a manner that may not exactly maximize
programme outputs. Care has therefore to be taken to ensure that the funds are used
exclusively for furthering the goals of the programme.
Centrality of Local Governments
Local Governments
Panchayati Raj Institutions are the designated agencies for the execution of schemes under
NREGA. Given the track record and capacity levels of the Panchayati Raj Institutions across
the country, particularly in the backward districts, there is need for capacity building in
these institutions to enable them to discharge their responsibilities.
Administrative and Institutional Arrangements
Technology
The key objectives that technology can facilitate in the implementation of NREGA are
efficiency, expediency, accountability, transparency, prevention of leakages and flexibility
to different administrative demands.
II
I.

Unlocking Human Capital: Entitlements and Governance - a case study
Corruption and Leakages
At a minimum, it should be ensured that funds reach the workers in a transparent way.
To prevent corruption and leakages, Gram Sabhas, self-help groups, local monitoring
committees and NGOs could possibly be involved in simultaneous monitoring of the
implementation of the Scheme under NREGA.
Transparency
Total transparency, with regard to selection of beneficiaries, identification of works
preparation of estimates, availability of Muster rolls for inspection and public payments to
workers should be undertaken.
Community Participation
There should be participation of the community in decision making regarding planning,
implementing, supervising and monitoring of the schemes.
SPECIAL PROBLEMS OF BACKWARD DISTRICTS
The districts selected for implementation in the first phase pose a major challenge. Out
of the 200 districts, 64 are plagued by extremism and 69 districts are included in the
Scheduled Areas and Tribal Areas. There are districts where Panchayats are non-existent
and in many places, non, functional. Difficult and varied topography makes adoption of
uniform norms impractical.
Widespread poverty is a common feature of all these districts. A large number of them are
located in arid and semi-arid regions.
These districts are also the most backward in terms of connectivity and spread of banking
and post office infrastructure.
The socio-economic indicators of most of these districts are generally below the national
average. Also, the proportion of SC/ST population in most of these areas is higher than
in other areas.
These districts are primarily agricultural and in 115 districts, the percentage of agricultural
labourers in the total rural working population is higher than the national average of 33
per cent.
II

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
The nature of local government varies considerably in these 200 districts. As stated
earlier, the constitution of local bodies in Schedule Areas under the Fifth Schedule will be
considerably different after the effective implementation ofPESA. Similarly, in some of the
Sixth Schedule Areas, such as, Mizoram and Meghalaya, where Part IX of the Constitution
is not applicable, the constitution of local bodies is different.
Because ofv ariation in population densifies, uniform norms for administrative staffing and
a uniform delivery mechanism for all the two hundred districts is untenable.
Delivery of basic public services in these backward districts has suffered due to, on the one
hand, weak administration, understaffing and lack of motivation and on the other, large
scale leakages. It is, therefore, necessary that the issue of strengthening the administrative
apparatus is addressed on priority.
Backward districts pose implementation challenges that are as varied as the terrain is
inhospitable. Given the heterogeneity and spatial dimensions of the constraints in these
two hundred backward districts, the approach of "one-size-fits-all" is not feasible. In the
ultimate analysis, the approach should be one that takes into account the heterogeneity,
specific problems and constraints, peculiar to each district.
ISSUFS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Change towards Universalisation and Entidements
Guaranteeing Reach
The real success of NREGA would lie in ensuring employment on demand to all rural
households in the selected districts. An important component of outreach is that the
households should be registered in an objective and transparent manner. Because of
inherent prejudices the complex social structure in rural areas, at times, degenerates into
a system of exclusion. This needs to be addressed through a three pronged approach of
strong affirmative action by the State Governments, proper monitoring by the Ministry
of Rural Development and the respective State Governments and an awareness generation
campaign aimed at changing attitudes.
Another dimension of outreach would be geographical. For difficult areas, special norms
would have to be laid down.
There is a contradiction between the Act and the Operational Guidelines regarding the
definition of a 'household'. While the Act defines a household to mean "the members of a
•

Unlocking Human Capital: Entitlements and Governance - a case study
family related to each other by blood, marriage or adoption and normally residing together
and sharing meals or holding a common ration card", the Operational Guidelines speak
of a nuclear family being the eligible unit under NREGA. The Commission is of the view
that the nuclear family, i.e. husband, wife and minor children, should be adopted as the
eligible unit as it would provide better employment opportunities especially for women and
physically challenged persons. It would also help in improving the reach of the Scheme.
Every adult physically challenged person must be given a job card and assigned tasks such
as supervision ofw orks, looking after creches, doing measurements etc. which do not entail
much physical effort.
Guaranteeing Outcomes
Successive impact evaluations, the first of which should be undertaken on completion of
three years of implementation, will facilitate decisions on closure of the Scheme in those
districts/blocks in which the objectives ofNREGA have been substantially met as determined
by attainment of pre-defined threshold levels of select parameters.
The impact evaluation systems would have to be more rigorous than the operational
.g uidelines. The parameters to be evaluated have to be identified and a baseline survey should
establish their current status.
Ensuring Convergence
Convergence with Other Service Delivery Mechanisms
Guaranteed employment for a period of 100 days to a rural household is a necessary but not
sufficient condition for livelihood security. A household requires health services, education
services, housing, food and nutrition security, social security etc. This would require gearing
up of all the other service delivery systems so that synergy is generated between employment
guarantee and other services.
Convergence with Other Infrastructure/Asset Generation Programmes
Merging the labour component of NREGA with the capital component of another
programme could create serious accounting problems. A simple solution could be to segregate
the earthwork component of other programmes. This earthwork component could then
be executed under NREGA, and the rest could be taken up under regular departmental
schemes.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Convergence in Planning
At present, all major schemes have their own prescribed methodology of preparing a plan
including NREGA. The 73rd Constitutional Amendment prescribes, the preparation of an
area plan. The Commission feels that there should be one plan and all departments should
cull out their programmes' plans out of this integrated plan.
Convergence in Machinery and Infrastructure for Implementation and Monitoring
Transfer of all rural development activities to the Panchayati Raj Institutions and delegation
of powers and equipping them with adequate trained officials would go a long way in
achieving convergence in use of funds and administrative machinery.
Convergence with Schemes under {Bharat Nirman'
Government of India has launched a time-bound plan for rural infrastructure in partnership
with State Governments and Panchayati Raj Institutions (2005-09) which is known as
'Bharat Nirm~n'.
There is a need for dove,tailing the projects under Bharat Nirman with wage employment
under NREGA for creation of durable assets and fiscal prudence.
Expanding the Scheme
The Commission feels that extension of NREGA should be taken up in a phased manner
and the block should be taken as a unit for .inclusion instead of a district, with the most
bac~ard blocks being taken up first as blocks are smaller and more homogeneous units
than districts.
A substantial portion of the funding comes from the Union Government. Indeed in case of
earthworks where no material component is required the contribution of State Governments
is almost nil. This provides a distorted incentive system wherein increased drawal of funds
from the Union Government need not mean significantly higher matching contributions
by State Governments, and therefore the states may have a tendency to keep the scheme
running for a longer time and on a larger scale than is actually required. A similar situation
exists at the Panchayat level.
Thus enforcing accountability of State Governments, Panchayati Raj Institutions, and the
administrative machinery would be of paramount importance.
II

Unlocking Human Capital: Entitlements and Governance - a case study
Fixing "Wage Rates
Section 6(1) of NREGA empowers the Union Government to specify the wage rates for
the purposes of the Act.
Minimum wages are generally fixed on time rate basis whereas works are executed on piece
rate basis. Reconciliation between the two poses a challenge. Moreover, the Minimum Wages
Act provides different rates for agriculture labour and construction work. Different thanks
also have different minimum wages. A detailed examination is necessary.
Financial Management System
Essential Elements ofa Financial Management System
The essential elements of an efficient financial management system are
(i) Adequate availability of funds.
(ii) Smooth flow of funds from the UnioI1 Government to districts and thereon
to Gram Panchayats and ultimately to the workers.
(iii) Smooth flow of financial information from Gram Panchayats to the districts,
the State and Union Government.
(iv) An appropriate accounting system which will provide timely and reliable
information.
(v) Authentication of the usage of funds and physical progress in creation of
assets.
(vi) Timely detection of any financial violation.
(vii) Ensuring contributions from State Governments as envisaged in the Act.
(viii) Total transparency and accountability.
(ix) Procedural simplicity.
II

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Operational Guidelines for Fund Flow
Release ofF unds to Districts
Costs and time both increase when funds flow through unnecessary intermediate levels.
In demand based schemes such as the REGS which require timely availability of funds
for smooth implementation with minimal overheads, routing funds through states is not
advisable. Instead, districts, which are closer to the points of utilization and are also charged
with the responsibility for implementation of REGS, should be the nodal points for funds
and information. Therefore, the Commission recommends that funds from both Union
and State Governments should be transferred to the districts for onward transmission to
the intermediate and Gram Panchayats.
Pre-requisites for Release
The guidelines provide that after 60 per cent of the funds released earlier are utilised, the
District on the Gram Panchayat can apply for release of additional funds.
Though replenishment should be contingent on some expenditure being incurred out of
the earlier releases, stipulating that a district should have spent 60 per cent of the previous
releases, there is a risk of starving 'performing' Panchayats. For example, if in a group of 500
Gram Panchayats in a district only a small number ofPanchayats fulfill their targets whereas
the others are unable to utilize the funds released to them, the aggregate of funds used by
all the Panchayats in the district could be below the 60 per cent stipulated for the next
release. To avoid such eventualities it would be appropriate to stipulate target (maximum)
levels for funds at Gram Panchayat, block and district levels and all replenishments will
be to raise the level of funds to the target level. fu these replenishments will be on a pre
determined cycle time, this is tantamount to replenishing the amounts spent at each Gram
Panchayat, block and district during the preceding cycle. The target levels can be reset in
case of anticipated surges in demand due to events such as droughts.
Proactive Not Reactive Fund Flow
REGS has to fulfill rights conferred on citizens to demand and get employment, and when
this demand is not fulfilled, the State Government will have to pay an unemployment
allowance. Funds flow from a higher level to a lower level (Union Government-District
Block-Gram Panchayat) will have to be activated on the basis of new triggers and would
be the responsibility of the higher level.

Unlocking Human Capital: Entitlements and Governance - a case study
Current accounting requirements impose a heavy burden on the Panchayats in maintaining
their accounts and managing their funds. Release of funds would also be delayed due to the
time required to receive, scrutinize and authorize release of funds under different accounting
heads. In addition, districts, State and Union Governments would all have to maintain a
full set of accounts under these
heads, which are an aggregation of the accounts maintained by the Panchayats. It is essential
that this procedure be simplified and release of funds be based on aggregate utilization of
funds, with the provision that higher levels have access to the accounting information of
the Gram (village) and Block Panchayats.
States' Contribution
As per the present guidelines the maximum a State would be required to contribute is
not likely to exceed 10 per cent of the project cost (excluding unemployment wages). The
Commission therefore recommends that the State's contribution be a fixed 10 per cent of the
total cost of REGS (excluding unemployment allowance). This would have the advantage
of reducing the accounting effort, as well as cost and time of fund flow management.
The state's contribution should reach the districts by the end of the financial year and, in
case of default, the amount due may be deducted from the allocation to the States under
'Central Assistance for State Plans'. This contribution will encourage the States to take a
more balanced view while fixing the wage rates under REGS.
Fixing Maximum Fund Levels
To ensure that funds do not remain idle at the Panchayats, blocks or districts, it will be
desirable to stipulate the maximum amount which should be maintained at any given time
at any level. Such maxima would have to be fixed for wage payments, purchase of materials
and administrative expenses taken together.
Since the replenishment would be based on the amounts utilized in the previous month, the
quantum of funds utilized would have to be ascertained for all levels in the beginning of each
month for the immediately preceding month. Assuming that this process of compilation
of information and processing at all levels would take about a month, bodies should have
enough funds to meet their requirements during this lead time. Thus the maximum level
of funds for the Gram Panchayats blocks and districts should be equal to their estimated
requirement for a two-month period (an additional 15 days' margin will be available at
each Gram Panchayat for expenditure incurred under various heads as all payments are to
11 ·
. I

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
be made fortnightly). It is important to note that while the cycle time is common for all
Panchayats, the maximum levels would vary from Panchayat to Panchayat.
Emphasis on Outputs and Outcomes
Periodic social audits should be mandatory at all Panchayats. This is discussed in subsequent
parts of the report.
Checks and Balances
Under the existing dispensation, the tools available for ensuring proper utilization of funds
are the mechanism of ' Utilisation Certificate' and the Audit. A Utilization Certificate (UC)
is a self certification document issued by a public authority certifying that the funds utilized
by it have been expended as per the extant rules and regulations. It is expected that such a
certificate would be issued after the-publie-authority-has-exerci-sed al-l-the-required-che-cks
and carried out the necessary verifications. It has been experienced that there are inordinate
delays in getting such utilization certificates and moreover the issuance of a certificate does
not guarantee proper utilization of funds as the various checks and verifications required are
seldom carried out. Some of the deficiencies about the utilization of funds are brought out
in periodic audits, but such audits often are too infrequent and also too late to take timely
corrective actions. Therefore ARC recommends that the present UC system be substituted
by an independent concurrent monitoring and financial audit system.
Under the concurrent monitoring and audit system, 100 per cent verification of accounts of
all the implementing agencies i.e. Gram Panchayats, Block Panchayats (intermediate level)
and the District Panchayats should be carried out as also a verification and reconciliation of
the financial and physical progress. This work should be entrusted to an independent external
agency well conversant with accounting procedures, which would carry out the monitoring
and audit at the beginning of every month for the transactions of the previous month.
The monitoring and audit exercise would basically bring out three types of discrepancies:
(a) discrepancies in the recording of transactions which can be rectified, (b) deficiencies
in following the procedures, and (c) misutilisation of funds, excess payments etc which
would have to be recovered.
In addition to recovering the misutilised amount from the responsible Pan chayat , it is
necessary that the administration at the next higher level investigates every such case
following due processes of law to fix responsibility on the individual(s) for defaults.
Further, misappropriated amount should be recovered from the concerned individuals
and prosecution launched against them under the prevailing laws. If in any state there are
lacunae in the prevailing laws for recovery and prosecution, then the states should make
II
I
LI

Unlocking Human Capital: Entitlements and Governance - a case study
appropriate amendments in their respective Panchayat Laws. This would act as a deterrent
against unethical and illegal practices.
Financial Information System
In order to ensure that decisions are data driven, reliable data capture is needed at the
Gram Panchayat level and also timely flow of information from the Gram Panchayat to
the higher levels namely the Block and District Panchayats, State and Union Governments.
The accounting system provides the data, which are the basis for information that flow
upwards.
The information system must achieve the following objectives:
Ensure timely and adequate availability of funds at all levels.
ii. Ensure proper utilization of funds.
iii. Ensure access to information to all levels.
In order to fulfill these objectives, the basic information to be made available at each level
would be: (a) the amount received, (b) the amount released to the immediate
succeeding level, (c) the amount utilized during the given time period, and (d) authentication
of the amount utilized (under various accounting heads at the Gram Panchayat, Block an~
District levels).
Mode ofP ayment to Workers
Although payments through banks/post offices is the surest way of ensuring that the
payment reaches the worker, the choice of mode of payment should be left to the worker.
Also irrespective of the mode selected by the worker, it must be ensured that the person/
agency preparing the muster roll is not also making the payment to the worker.
In drought prone and remote areas (tribal and hilly areas), it would be desirable to provide
an element of food security under NREGA. Therefore a part of the wages may be disbursed
in terms of foodgrains especially since payment in kind is also envisaged under NREGA.
Role ofB anks and Post Offices in Fund Flow
All the Gram Panchayats do not have banks. Inclusion of post offices would ease the
situation to some extent.
II

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
The Department of Posts raised the following issues while agreeing to the use of the post
office network for fund flow under NREGA:
i. Remunerating the Department of Posts for REGS savings accounts.
ii. Approve opening of zero balance accounts.
iii. Approve opening of Institutional accounts.
There may be some reluctance on the part of banks and post offices to open a large number
of accounts in the names ofw orkers as these would be low balance accounts (these accounts
would be required to facilitate payments through cheques or accounts transfer). The rural
poor would also need guidance and handholding to familiarize themselves with banking
operations. While it is true that servicing such a large number of accounts could increase
the transactional costs for the banks, in the long run with core banking solutions these
costs could be minimized.
Preparing Estimates for Works
Piece rate system
a. Payment is based on measurement of the amount of work.
b. The amount of work is measured in terms of physical parameters, such as
volume of the pit dug, quantity of soil carried for a given distance, length of
road laid etc.
c. The amount of work is converted from physical to monetary terms using the
Schedule of Rates. In fact the work estimates are prepared and sanctioned hased
on the Schedule of Rates.
d. If only one person is engaged in work, then payment becomes easier as he/
she gets the entire amount as per the Schedule of Rates. But in real situations
this would seldom happen. The problem would then arise as to how this total
amount of compensation has to be distributed among the workers. A contractor
does this through an informal mechanism, where he makes payment to the
gang leader and the gang has internal norms for its distribution. (The muster
rolls would never be able to capture this).
e. Under an employment generation scheme a cross section or workers would be
applying for work whose physical strength and skills may vary. Discrimination
II
I •

Unlocking Human Capital: Entitlements and Governance - a case study
based on the amount of output would go against the basic principles of the
Scheme.
f. Another problem could be that the Schedule of Rates is prepared assuming that
persons of normal physical strength would be executing the works. In reality the
combination of workers (men and women) who report for work may vary. And
at the end it is quite possible that when payments are made as per the Schedule
of Rates, workers would get less than the prescribed minimum wages.
Time rate system
a. Under the time rate system, payment is made in proportion to the time spent
by a worker at the workplace. Simply stated, payment is made on the basis of
attendance.
b. This type of system is best suited for employment generation works as all the
workers get paid equally irrespective of their physical strength, their skills and
most importantly irrespective of the actual physical work done by them.
c. Since payment is not made on the basis of the work turned out, measurement
of work is not required (at least for making payments).
d. Thus under this system it is difficult to establish a linkage between the amount
paid and the quantity of work. A basic question that arises under such
circumstances is how will an estimate for works be prepared?
e. Scope for misuse of funds is very high for the reasons indicated at (c) and (d)
above.
f. Influential villagers may not work themselves and instead make others work,
but still get paid, defeating the self targeting nature of the scheme.
g. Under this system, the scheme may become a mere dole scheme.
Several State Governments have in fact adopted the piece rate system. The Commission has
examined the merits and demerits of both the systems, and on balance, finds that it would
be better to follow a piece rate system, since the possibility of misuse would be much less
in this system.
The Operational Guidelines provide that the State Governments should undertake
comprehensive work, time and motion studies and evolve the District Schedule of Rates

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
(DSR). These studies should observe out-turn and fix rates after detailed location specific
observations. This implies that productivity norms must follow possible out-turn under
different geo-morphological and climatic conditions, across and within districts. The
Commission agrees that a district-wise Schedule of Rates needs to be evolved rather than
adoption of the existing PWD Schedule of Rates.
While developing the district-wise Rural Schedule of Rates, States should ensure that inter
district variations in the quantum of labour required for the same work are kept within
an acceptable band. Similarly, the Union Government can coordinate with the State
Governments so that the inter state variations are also within acceptable bands.
Another problem related to measurement of works is payments to be made to women,
physically challenged or elderly people. During field visits of the Commission, some elderly
and physically challenged persons expressed concern and apprehension that they would be
paid very low wages under NREGA since they do not conform to the productivity norms
applicable for able-bodied persons. The Commission feels that this factor needs to be taken
into consideration while preparing the district-wise Schedule of Rates for such persons.
Moreover, they could be assigned light duties like supervision work, looking after creches,
measurements of works etc. Additionally, the money for a particular work should be equally
distributed to all members of the group. This would also help in generating positive group
dynamics which, in turn, would facilitate· better work turn out and minimize misuse of
funds.
Maintaining Labour Material Ratio
The guidelines stipulate that the ratio of6 0:40 for labour and material respectively
should be maintained at Gram Panchayat/blockJdistrict level (cost of material involved
should not exceed 40 per cent of the total project cost). This may however be misused
for balancing of certain works in order to manipulate the ratio. For example, at the Gram
Panchayat level, if out of three works to be taken up in a year, two are estimated to have
a labour component of 80 per cent, the Panchayat would be free to select the third work
which could have a material component of almost 80 per cent. This would defeat the basic
objective of the scheme as the third work would generate hardly any employment. Worse
still, if the balancing takes place at the block level, it would cause serious administrative
problems. The Commission is of the view, that as far as possible the material component
should not exceed the prescribed percentage (40 per cent) of the total cost for each work.
If there is difficulty in achieving the ratio in each work the ratio should be maintained at
the level of the Gram Panchayat/Block Panchayat.
II

Unlocking Human Capital: Entitlements and Governance - a case study
Mechanism for Procurement
Since the scheme provides for up to 40 per cent of the outlay to be used towards meeting
the cost of the material component, purchases of a substantial magnitude would be required.
It is necessary for all State Governments to evolve and disseminate sound procurement
procedures, which are totally transparent and ensure that these are meticulously followed
by the Panchayats.
Administrative and Institutional Arrangements
Strengthening Local Governments
Building Institutions
As p@F-Se-€ tie-n-l-6-6f--NREG-A-the-Gram-Panchayat 's-respurrsib-I-e-for idem:tfication aner
execution of works and the Gram Sabha is responsible for monitoring and social audit. The
Commission found that in some states, even though these institutions exist they have not
been sufficiently empowered to implement such large schemes. The first step would be to
empower these institutions in the true spirit of the 73rd Amendment and this empowerment
would have to be both administrative and financial. Panchayati Raj Institutions should
evolve as institutions which can plan and execute development programmes in their areas; all
developmental schemes which are better implemented at the local level should be transferred
to the Panchayats along with their implementing staff. With this enhanced responsibility
it would be necessary to have an officer of appropriate seniority as the CEO of the District
Panchayat and the Block/Intermediate Panchayat.
Capability Building
Generally Panchayats are understaffed and the quality of the staff leaves much to be desired.
Very often officials posted in difficult areas do not reside there and prefer to function
far from their place of work. Innovative procedures and tools such as appointment to a
particular post rather than to a service cadre and appointment from amongst local people
would be an effective way to ensure that the implementation staff stays in their respective
place of work. Contractual appointments with liberal incentives could also be thought of
to fill these posts.
The requirement of staff is two-fold: administrative and technical. The administrative
staff looks after all the administrative functions under the scheme while the technical staff
carries out functions such as preparing estimates, supervising the execution of work, giving
technical advice, measuring work, quantifying the value of work etc. A good option would
II
\ I

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
be to have a panel of engineers at the block level. These engineers need not be engaged on
a full time basis, but could help in preparing and approving estimates for works. Educated
youth (non:...engineers) may be trained in preparing draft estimates, to be finally approved
by the panel of engineers at the block/intermediate level.
The guidelines authorise 2 per cent of the annual allocation to be used for meeting the
administrative costs. Expenditure on a full complement of administrative and technical
staff which is commensurate with the responsibilities devolving on the Panchayats would,
however, call for a higher percentage of the allocation being earmarked for the purpose.
Field officers felt that the existing provision is not adequate and there is need to revise it
upwards.
Some of the States have very small panchayats. Having a full complement of staff in each
of these small Gram Panchayats may not be financially viable. In such cases the State
G~vernment may group these Gram Panchayats into compact administrative units for the
purpose of staffing.
Another factor is that the demand for employment is seasonal and usually coincides with
the period having minimal agricultural activities. Obviously the staff requirement for
implementation ofNREGA would follow a similar pattern. Such variability in the number
of staff required cannot be matched by conventional cadre service based appointments.
At the same time the entire personnel cannot be on a temporary basis. Therefore NREGA
would have to be implemented by an imaginative mix of permanent and contractual staff
based on ground realities.
As described in Chapter 4, there are several districts infested with extremism and violent
activities disrupting normal administration. In such areas, officials often work through proxy
and 'remote control'. Special incentive packages need to be devised to motivate officials
to work in these areas. Also the District Collectors would have to be made responsible for
proper implementation of the Act. A District Task Force comprising the District Collector,
the Superintendent of Police, Chief Executive of the District Panchayat and other concerned
officers should be constituted to ensure that the provisions of NREGA are implemented
properly.
Selection and Maintenance a/Works
As most of the works pertain to drought proofing, irrigation and land treating, these
would necessarily have to follow the principles of watershed management and since the
boundaries of watersheds would transcend the geographical boundaries of Panchayats it

Unlocking Human Capital: Entitlements and Governance - a case study
would be necessary to have a coordinated action plan. The Block/Intermediate Panchayat
should ensure this and also see to it that the works in one Gram Panchayat do not adversely
affect the adjoining Gram Panchayat. The same principle should be followed by the District
Panchayat to ensure coordination between works having inter-block ramifications. Works
pertaining to both inter-Panchayat and inter-block should be taken up only after due
approval of the respective Gram and Block Panchayats.
Section 16(5) ofNREGA stipulates that at least 50 per cent of the works in terms of its cost
should be implemented through Gram Panchayats. All efforts should be made to ensure
that most of the works are executed through the Gram Panchayats and the need to take up
works by the Block Panchayat should arise only in case of inter-Panchayat works or where
the Gram Panchayats have not been able to meet the demand for employment.
As most of the activities under NREGA pertain to earthwork, periodic maintenance would
be required so that the assets are productively used. Therefore maintenance ofw orks created
under NREGA should be a permissible activity. This provision has already been made under
the Operational Guidelines.
Block Resource Centre
The operational guidelines provide for setting up of a Technical Resource Support Group
at the Government of India, state and district levels. Implementation of the Scheme under
NREGA and even other national or state level programmes requires availability of technical
expertise of planners, water resources experts, agricultural scientists etc. These are now
required at the block level to extend the planning and execution of schemes to the next
level. Therefore, a Block Resource Centre should be constituted in each block. This Centre
should provide technical advice and support to the Block Panchayats. The Block Resource
Centre should work under the overall guidance of the District Technical Resource Support
Group.
Entrepreneurship Institutes for the Rural Poor
The Rural Development and Self Employment Training Programme (RUDSET) in
Karnataka is an excellent example of having trained over one lakh persons at entrepreneurial
institutes set up in every block. These training institutes were set up with public-private-civil
society partnership'and because of the knowledge and skills that they were able to impart,
over 70 per cent of those trained could set up their own enterprises.
Viewed from this perspective, the RUDSET type ofk nowledge intensive training programmes
would be a logical step in the chain of employment creation triggered by NREGA.
II

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
It is therefore proposed that entrepreneur training institutes be set up in every block to be
financed as a part of the earmarked administrative costs of NREGA.
Monitoring Systems
Chapter 8 of the Operational Guidelines prescribes the monitoring and evaluation system
to be adopted. It is also stated that a comprehensive Monitoring and Information System
(MIS) will be developed by the Ministry of Rural Development, and a national online
monitoring system for key performance indicators will be evolved.
The guidelines call for submission of three monthly reports, namely (i) Employment
generation report (ii) Financial progress report (iii) Physical progress of works report.
These three reports do not however capture all the parameters necessary to monitor the
functioning of the Scheme. This underscores the need for evolving a more comprehensive
set of parameters, which could, then, be closely monitored. These additional parameters
could include the following:
a. Average amount being spent on generation ofw ork equivalent to one man-day
in each district.
b. Month-wise generation of employment and its correlation with agricultural
seasons.
c. Average wage received by a worker.
d. Ratio of State share to the Central share each year.
e. Ratio of male and female workers.
f. Quality of assets.
In the Section dealing with Financial Management Systems, Concurrent Monitoring
and Audit by independent agencies has been suggested. Although the focus here will be
on financial transactions, examining the physical status of works and other parameters is
also required. It would therefore be advisable if the same agencies are assigned the task of
validating monitoring reports prepared by the village and block and district Pandiayats.
This would help in generation of reports without inconsistencies. These agencies could also
do 'handholding' for the Panchayat officials in maintenance of records and preparation of
reports.
-II

Unlocking Human Capital: Entitlements and Governance - a case study
Curbing Corruption and Leakages
In case ofNREGA, theoretically since there is no limit on funds which may be drawn, the
potential for misuse is high. All the works prescribed have earthwork as a major component
which makes them less durable and difficult for future verification. Another associated issue
is inflation of the estimated cost of the works selected by the technical staff. In order to
address this problem, a four-pronged approach would be suitable. First of all, templates of
cost estimates for most general works identified to be accomplished in a block should be
prepared. Secondly, the documentation of all works and payments should be made perfect.
Thirdly, a very strong community control and audit mechanism should be put in place.
Fourthly, an independent set of monitors should carry out verification of all records and
their reconciliation with the assets. All these should be backed up by an effective grievances
redressal mechanism.
Developing Standardized and Simplified Procedures for Preparation ofE stimates
Preparation of an estimate for the work to be carried out is crucial. If the process could
be simplified, it would have the dual advantage of requiring less technical staff and being
transparent. This could be achieved if standardized templates for preparation of estimates
are developed. The process could also be computerized.
Muster Roll and Measurement Book
The two most important records to be maintained under NREGA are the muster roll and
the measurement book. As the system for payment would be the piece rate system, after
completion of each work cycle, the measurement of work will have to be carried out and
the total monetary value would have to be proportionately distributed to the workers based
on their attendance. In order to ensure that there is a linkage between the work turned out
and the total payment made, it would be better if an abstract of the measurement book
giving out the details of the work measurement is incorporated in the muster rolls. If a
photograph of the actual work done during the cyde is also attached with the muster roll,
it would help in making the system even more leak proof.
Grievances Redressal Mechanism
Although an elaborate mechanism for grievances redressal has been prescribed, it has to be
ensured that it is proactive and effective. The grievances redressal machinery should reach
out to the people in order to redress the grievances as the poor workers who are denied their
rights may not be easily forthcoming in complaining against established authorities.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Transparency and Right to Information Act
Each Panchayat (village, block and district) is a public authority under the Right to
Information Act. This implies that the Panchayat has to discharge all the obligations which
have been placed on it by the Right to Information Act. For this, the Panchayat members
and the functionaries need to be fully aware of the provisions of the Right to Information
Act. During its field visits, the Commission found that many Panchayat members, villagers
and even officials did not have adequate knowledge about these two important legislations.
To address this, the Commission suggests the following strategy:
a. Raising awareness levels, and
b. Conducting continuing training programmes.
This would call for earmarking of adequate funds for the purpose and preparation of
focused training materials based on Training Needs Assessment (TNA). The Ministry of
Rural Development and Department of Personnel & Training could identify institutions
to develop such materials. A mechanism enabling an independent impact evaluation of
these programmes needs to be put in place. The Commission suggests outsourcing these
activities to NGOs and Self Help Groups with adequate expertise.
There should be emphasis on disclosure of information suo-motu under Section 4 of
the Right to Information Act, so that the need to respond to requests for information is
minimized.
The Act provides for inclusion of any non-governmental organization authorized by the
Union or State Government as 'implementing agency' for any work taken up under the
Scheme. In many parts of the country, a number of Non-Governmental Organizations have
a presence even in very remote areas, where generating awareness and creating capabilities
solely by or through government agencies would be a daunting task not to speak of the
financial costs involved. Such NGOs need to be identified for utilization of their spatial
reach and credibility towards achieving this goal.
Use of Information Technology
Blocks as Nodal Fully-Electronic Points
The strength of the electronic system is derived pardy from its ability to aggregate
information from multiple sources, and thereafter to perform the computationally intensive
analysis needed to judge the efficiencies of operation through monitoring and checks. This

Unlocking Human Capital: Entitlements and Governance - a case study
advantage of information technology, however, can only be derived fully if the data that is
collected is itself in electronic form. It is imperative therefore that records of work taken
up under the REGS - project details, workers' records, finances, etc. -should all be digital.
However, the districts around the country in which the scheme will be implemented initially
have different levels of internet connectivity, access to computing technologies, reliable data
transmission capacities, and so on. While there is an ongoing national effort to increase the
penetration of pes, the Internet is yet to reach many locations, in particular the ones in
which citizens will need the benefit of an employment guarantee the most.
The IT system for REGS, therefore, needs to be forward looking. While anticipating that all
levels of government will eventually be wired and able to communicate through high-speed
networks, the system must nonetheless be currently designed to ensure that any data that
is manually created today can be converted into electronic form swiftly and reliably.
A Minimum and Common Set ofN ational Standards for Data
States must be able to adopt the most pragmatic implementation of the REGS, as determined
by each state, and at the same time, ensure the highest standards of accountability. This can
be best achieved through the establishment of standards for reporting. Standards must be
established both for the types of data to be collected (i.e. the particular fields to be included
in every database) as well as the formats in which the data is reported to higher levels of
government. States may use the software that they deem appropriate for record-keeping of
projects taken up under the REGS, but any software so chosen must then report the data
that is gathered in a nationally uniform format that includes fields that are specified. This
will allow the Government of India to collate information from different sources more
easily, and apply its analytical efforts to them.
An example of this is as follows: The implementing agency may collect its list of beneficiaries
and store these in a particular brand of spreadsheet software, but this list of beneficiaries,
when submitted to a higher level of government, must be only in the form and format
specified for reporting, and not in the format used for implementation.
Architecture for Deployment
Proper distribution of computing systems for the REGS also needs to be developed. It
must be recognised that the distribution of software and hardware skills needed for such an
extensive system is highly skewed, with most professionals based in cities and towns. It may
be difficult to staff individual implementing locations with technical personnel needed to
create and manage digital data. Fortunately, this may also not be necessary if an appropriate
II

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
mix of distributed vs. centralised hardware is selected for the system. Central locations can
act as repositories of the data, provided the data gathered through distributed systems locally
contain at least the minimum expected in the National Standards list, and are in a format
appropriate to enter the data into the reporting application locally or at the block.
At block and higher levels, the IT system should comprise essentially of servers designed to
facilitate monitoring and analysis at higher levels of government. PCs should only be needed
at lower levels of government. However, since data is first captured at the implementing
level, there must be adequate alternate options available for data capture at this level even
when electronic systems are fully in place.
Assessment ofI nitial Deployment by Ministry ofR ural Development
The Ministry of Rural Development has begun implementing an IT system for the Scheme.
This was studied by the Commission.
The rapidity with which the IT system for this large scheme has been developed is impressive.
Moreover, it is understood that the system is in its initial months of deployment, and
refinements to the system are being made on the basis of experience at the field level.
Nonetheless, the many observations of the ARC developed in the course of its consultations
have thrown up areas that need attention in the design and development of the IT
system.
Unique Identification System
To be able to unambiguously establish identity of each beneficiary in the REGS, there
needs to be a citizens' database with unique identifiers assigned to each participant. Citizen
identification in the REGS must establish a new direction - that of establishing unique
identities for citizens in a manner that is usable by all other government systems too, and
thus drive convergence towards the establishment of a national identification number for
all citizens. The difficulty in establishing such a system is to determine where to begin.
Most identification documents are issued only to a fraction of the population. What is
needed to overcome such difficulties is the following: large national systems that include
participation from hundreds of millions of citizens should be selected for the first use of a
national identification number, and this should progressively be turned to wider use in all
computerized records of citizens with the governments at all levels.
The REGS could potentially reach tens of millions of citizens even in the first phase of
implementation, and if extended to the other two-thirds of the districts in the country, the
number of participants will be much more. It is also a national system for which a uniform
II

Unlocking Human Capital: Entitlements and Governance - a case study
format can be developed and applied. The REGS, with its scale and reach, is the kind of
national programme in which such identification should begin. It is especially advantageous
that the REGS is a rural programme, for it is in rural areas that many other identity systems
do not have participants.
IT System for Financial Management
The cost of delivering benefits through wage employment programmes has historically
been found to be much higher than the benefits themselves. Implementation of NREGA
is too big a scheme to afford that risk, and therefore every effort must be made to keep its
costs under control.
Through a number of standardised reporting documents, the data in the expenditure
management process, whether manual or electronic, can be standardised and aggregated
at the block level. Integration at a non-implementing level can provide multiple points of
checks and balances which cannot be interfered with by officials at any single level.
Money transfers between levels of government should be automatic and through an electronic
system. Funds flow for the projects can also be based on triggers set to initiate the transfer of
money, and such transfers can be made directly to the lowest level of financial management
from the Government of India wherever possible. Automatic triggers for keeping operational
accounts funded will allow local implementers to respond quickly to needs.
The accuracy of information in the system is highest when it has multiple points of
verifiability. Also, being able to identify each transaction uniquely is key to preserving a
robust monitoring capability. Aggregated financial information can make it difficult to detect
leakages, and to avoid this, all information in the financial management system should be
dis aggregated at the level of individual transactions.
IT System for Monitoring and Evaluation
The rules established for the implementation ofNREGA identify key yardsticks that must
be adhered to -in prioritising work to be taken up, rates of wages to be paid, compensation
in lieu of wages, timeliness of payments, maximum eligibility of individuals and households,
etc. In addition, the reporting standards to be established for implementing agencies
will require compliance with specific formats for data storage and transfer. Each of these
requirements creates an opportunity for an 'in-process' check by which to monitor adherence
to the legal bo~nds of the Scheme. Such triggers, if established within the IT system itself,
can help detect impermissible or unexpected operations quickly, thus facilitating action to
remedy them.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
In addition to in-process monitoring, it will be important to periodically assess the
performance of the NREGA using aggregate data from disparate regions. Once key variables
to be monitored are identified, the IT system can aggregate these variables at different levels
of government and provide system-generated rankings of Panchayats, blocks, districts and
states periodically.
Certain kinds of information are also more meaningful when visualised in map spaces,
rather than as fields in databases. In addition to tabulation of information for analysis, the
IT system must include a Geographic Information System with uniform and common
identification of administrative units (Gram Panchayats, blocks, districts, states) using
which aggregate information about NREGA implementation can be seen on maps and
understood accordingly For this, the jurisdiction of each implementing level of government
(the districts, blocks and Gram Panchayats) must be stored in geo-coded form, and the
relationship between the different jurisdictions (e.g. blocks within districts) known. Maps
can then be created from the same base data at different aggregate levels. This will improve
administrators' ability to understand the effectiveness of the implementation and identify
particular areas that need special attention on an ongoing basis.
Right to Information in NREGA and Use ofI T
The IT system for the REGS should therefore anticipate and embed the requirements for
disclosure and reporting into the implementation of the system itself.
A simple approach to this may be to use a set of rules that assure the accuracy of responses
to requests under the RTI Act. These are (a) the information that is required to be in the
public domain should be auto-generated by the IT system; and (b) information that is
sought by the public should be studied continuously to determine whether this too should
be added to the auto-generation modules. Auto-generation is key to suo motu disclosures
particularly, and over time should become key to all RTI responses.
A second principle to mitigate errors is 'coupling administration with disclosure'. If the data
that is reported in response to mandates of the RTI Act is unreliable, then it will not serve
the purpose of the Act. Additionally, the government's interest in ensuring integrity will
be undermined. Fortunately, an IT system provides an excellent opportunity to tackle this,
by simply linking the use of IT for administrative functions to the use of IT for reporting
and RTI compliance. The same data - not copies, but the same datasets - if used for both
administrative and citizen-facing purposes, will ensure that officials are diligent in creating
data accurately.
II

Unlocking Human Capital: Entitlements and Governance - a case study
The Commission is of the view that Smart Cards should be tried on a pilot basis in a cluster
of villages. Efforts should be made to make the cards to be put to multiple use. It would be
better if a viable business model is worked out in the pilot projects so that the infrastructure
for Smart Card comes as a part of initiative of the private sector.
Implementation ofN REGA in Fifth and Sixth Schedule Areas
The development of model guidelines for conferring original jurisdiction on Gram Sabhas
as envisaged in PESA was examined by the expert group on "Planning at the Grassroots
Level". In the Report, it has been highlighted that powers statutorily devolved upon
Gram Sabhas and Panchayats are not matched by the concomitant transfer of funds and
functionaries resulting in the making the Panchayats ineffective. The Commission studied
the recommendations and suggestions relating to PESA and the Fifth Schedule, and agrees
with these.
The tribal areas in the Sixth Schedule are organized as autonomous districts. If there are
different Scheduled Tribes in an autonomous district, the areas are divided into autonomous
regions. The administration of these districts/regions is vested in District Councils/Regional
Councils, which also have powers to make laws regarding the management and use of local
resources, village administration, appointment and succession of Chiefs or Headmen etc.
Keeping in mind the special self-governing traditions of the tribal areas falling under the
Sixth Schedule, the NCRWC has made specific recommendations for these areas and the
Commission agrees with them.
Implementation ofN REGA in Areas Affected by Natural Calamities
The Commission is of the view that simultaneous execution of works under NREGA and
'Calamity Relief would lead to duplication as well as confusion. Therefore, demand for
employment in any area should be first met through works under NREGA, since the works
are from a shelf of projects and are a part of an overall plan and they have been selected
by the Gram Panchayats. Relief works (in cases of natural calamities) should be taken up
only if demand for work exists and the households have exhausted their entitlements under
NREGA.
Relaxation of Certain Restrictive Provisions
Revision in the List ofP ermissible Works
Schedule-I of the Act lists out the types of works that can be taken up under the scheme.
While it is true that these works are ideally suited for the drought prone and dry areas
II

lkports ofFcll~j~dmihistrive_ illeform <Lommissiom-A: Summary
a:ruil sho~d, therefDre, 'cCll'lstii!l!ltte t&e CDre' 0ffa a:.tiyitiE 'urrd~rnh~ SUH'-6me~ tHrelis wDuld
need supplementing, dependliimg; (\)till ~ loEalI n«qp.imm~n~ 0f'tlh:.e aTffal w&rretHteSUlhune
is prDpDsed to. be implemente€l ,
Number ofW orkers to Commmc'e a WOrk
The Act stipulates that a minimtllm allhattm((!)f 5@ WID'lilkelis is'relqll1l£ned eX\C£:ept 1m c£:d)Se' ([)fhillly
areas and in respect Df affDrestat!f(i)'tiI w(lJnits.
This implies that if the number of wonker-s \Who 3JIie' available is less than 50 and there is
no. DngDing wDrk, then the Dnly work ~ the Gram Panchayat is permitted to. take up
is affDrestatiDn. Since affDrestatiDn caJllIlilot lbe taken up thrDughDut the year and mDre so.
under drDught cDnditiDns, it could dfeaivte1y meam denial Df emplDyment DppDrtunities
if the number Df interested wDrkers is less tlhan 50.
Records
The mDst impDrtant dDcument in the Scheme is the job ·C£:ardJ. 1he emnries)Lm de card can be
classified into. static and dynamic. While the static entries are to be Nilade mn:ly DccasiDnally,
the dynamic entries are to. be made mDre often.
In the interest Df better mDnitDring, the prDcess Df making entries in the job card shDuld
be linked to. an event in the payment cycle.
The jDb card is alSo. the sDle dDcument, which keeps track Df the entitlements Df the
hDusehDld. The prDcedure fDllDwed by cDmmercial banks, Df depending Dn ledgers
maintained by them even when the aCCDunt hDlders have passbDDks, shDuld be emulated
by the Panchayats in respect Df jDb cards. It is therefDre prDpDsed that Panchayats maintain
a JDb Card Ledger which is a "shadD~" Df the jDb cards.
The Asset Register recDrds details Df wDrks taken up under the Scheme. Since the muster
rDll is the basic dDcument fDr maintaining recDrd Df emplDyment, it wDuld be Df use if
details Df such infDrmatiDn as in the muster rDll are captured in the asset register, muster
rDll-wise, so. that the prDcess can (a) facilitate the crDss-referencing Df vital parameters, and
(b) ~nable the aVDidance Df mistakes while making entries.
It is alSo. suggested that~ instead Dfhaving a single cDmpDsite entry Dn materials, it shDuld be
vDucher-wise, so. that at a later date, each vDucher cDuld be traced, shDuld the need arise.

lUnlockiBg IFIufilah (Capi11t:il: fEntitlirmentsranljf(jjovemance - a eitse.stut!y
CoordinatilJn Medhanism
Various agenCies/authorities have 'been set tIP at IGovernment of Indi.a, state .and district
levels in order to ens"Ure propet hnplemei'lt;ation ot NREGA.. Under the Mt, "a Central
Employment Guarallltee Council (CEGe) h:as to he set up by the Union Government. The
purpose of this Coundl would be to advise Governmentoflndia on.all matters conc.erning
the implementation of the ACt) est{lbB~hlllg and evaluating the ifi~fiitoring syst~m and
preparation of annual reports to be laid before Parliament by th~ Uhiofi Goverrtment\
Similarly, the State Employment Guarantee Couhdl (SEGG ot 'State C()unde fot short)
is to be set up by every State Goverhment under Section 12 of NREGA\ The SE.GC shall
advise the State Government on the implementation of the Scheme, afid evaluate and
monitor it; Other ro'les of the State Council include deciding on the -'pref~rted works; to
be implemented under REGS, and recommending the proposals of works to be submitted
to the Union Government by the State Governmeht uhder Schedule I Section 1 (ix) of the
Act. The State Council will prepare an Annual Report on REGS, to be presented to the
State Legislature.
Similar institutional arrangements have been prescribed under other flagship programmes
and the Bharat Nirman Programme. The Commission feels that over and above the standing
or adhoc committees in each ministry; there is need for one common irttef-tfiihisterial,
empowered steering committee for NREGA, other flagship programmes and the Bharat
Nirrnan Programme. The Cabinet Secretary may be the Chairman with the concerned
Secretaries as Members of this Committee.
Building a National Identity
The NREGA is a landmark initiative which enshrines a 'rights-based' approach to
development. Apart from livelihood security, if implemented in letter and spirit, it will
strengthen Panchayati Raj Institutions, enable participatory planning at grass,roots level,
empower women and bridge gender gaps, energise decentralization and administrative and
institutional structures consequently leading to good governance particularly in the more
backward districts, and redress un'equal power structures. In order to fully capture all these
facets, it would be appropriate to call-the initiative 'Rashtriya SukshemaAbhiyan'. It will give
the legislation, its various schemes and all its stakeholders a common national identity.
•

CRISIS MANAGEMENT
- From Despair to Hope
Introduction
'Crisis' may be defined as "an emergency situation arising out of natural or human activity
which poses a threat to human life and property or leads to large scale disruption of
normal life" . A crisis may degenerate into a disaster if it is not properly managed.
Preparedness and quick response can save lives, protect property and lessen disruptions.
This calls for a total and effective response, which should not only incorporate traditional
coping mechanisms, but also involve meticulous planning and coordination.
In this Report, the Commission has dealt primarily with natural and man-made disasters
but has used the terms 'crisis' and 'disaster' interchangeably as relevant in the context.
Crisis situations caused by hostile elements like terrorists and extremists will be dealt with
in its Report on 'Public Order'.
CRISIS MANAGEMENT -AN OVERVIEW
Types of Crises
Crises can be classified into the following categories:
(i) Crises caused by acts of nature. These can further be divided into the following
sub-categories:
a. Climatic events: cyclones and storms (associated sea erosion), floods and
drought and
b. Geological events: earthquakes, tsunamis, landslides and avalanches;
(ii) Crises caused by environmental degradation and disturbance of the ecological
balance;
(iii) Crises caused by accidents. These, again, can be further classified into:
industrial and nuclear mishaps and fire related accidents;
II

Crisis Management - From Despair to Hope
(iv) Crises caused by biological activities: public health crises, epidemics etc;
(v) Crises caused by hostile elements: war, terrorism, extremism, insurgency etc;
(vi) Crises caused by disruption/failure of major infrastructure facilities including
communication systems, large-scale strikes etc; and
(vii) Crises caused by large crowds getting out of control.
Scale of Crises
Depending on its intensity and area of impact, a crisis situation may be labeled as local,
sub-district, district, state or national level.
Crisis Management
In the traditional disaster management approach, the focus was on emergency relief and
immediate rehabilitation. A 'Welfare State' entails wider responsibilities to address the
factors leading to the crisis, in a manner that ideally prevents their occurrence, or at any
rate, significantly reduces their ill effects.
This 'life cycle' of crisis management may be divided broadly in three phases - pre-crisis,
during crisis and post crisis.
Phases of Crisis/Disaster Management
Pre-Crisis: Preparedness
This is the period when long ~erm and short term steps can be taken for preventing and
mitigating the crisis and preparing for actual occurrence.
For different types of disasters, mitigation measures may vary but to assign priority and
importance to be attached to various measures. An appropriate legal and operational
framework is essential.
During Crisis -Emergency Response
. When a crisis actually occurs, in certain 'primary activities' such as evacuation, search
and rescue, followed by provision of basic needs suc.h as food, clothing, shelter, medicines
become indispensable.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms CommissiOl1 - A Summary
Post-Crisis
Recovery: This stage comprises activities that encompass two overlapping phases of
rehabilitation and reconstruction.
Rehabilitation: Includes provision of temporary public ut]~iitiies and housing as interim
measures to assist long term recovery.
Reconstruction: Includes construction of damaged infrastructure and habitats and
enabling sustainable livelihoods.
Elements of Crisis Management
A crisis management strategy should aim at:
1. Creating appropriate legal and organizational framework;
ii. Making government organizations, local bodies, communitiesl'groups and
individuals at all levels aware of the risk of potential natural and man-made
hazards as well as their vulnerabilities;
iii. Meticulous long and short term planning for crisis management, and effective
implementation of plans and enforcement measures;
iv. Building resilience of the communities to face crises and ensuring then full
participation;
v.Buildingandmaintainingcapabilities (human and institutional), infrastructure
and logis"tics; and
vi. Developing and disseminating knowledge for effective crisis management.
Integration of traditional knowledge in crisis management efforts.
A Shift to Disaster Risk Reduction
Disaster risk reduction (disaster reduction) has been defined as the 'systematic development
and application of policies, strategies and practices to minimise vulnerabilities, hazards and
the unfolding of disaster impacts throughout a society, in the broad context of sustainable
development' .

Crisis Management - From Despair to Hope
Disastcr1Risk Reduction Framavork
Policy towards Risk Management
A policy framework has tm 'he (drawllil up backeal by the requisite legall ~d linstitn!l1niom-a!i
mechanism that focuses on risk red:urcnion as the major priority in disaster nnanag-em.emt.
Assessment ojR isk including Hazard Analysis and Vulnerability
Risk assessment ,is done based on the assessment of hazards and tthe resiliieIilce of ttlhe
community.
f!f
Risk Awareness and Preparation Plans for Risk Mitigll;tiron
Having assessed thesisk the next :step is to make the 5taike.m.older£ alfid rtihe dlecision makers
aware of the risk. AtPlan of action, which should inclu<te lboth [ong \term .and short teli11il
components need to e prepared.
Ear~ Warning Systems
Technological advances have helped in accurately forecastrmg some of the disasters. 'The
challenge is to use mechanisms to ensure that the warnirrgreaehesthevuhterable population
with utmost urgency.
INDIA'S KEY HAZARDS, VULNERABILITIES AND THE CRISIS RESPONSE
MECHANISM
The High Cost of Disasters
India is very vulnerable to natural hazards because of its unique geo-climatic conditions.
Almost 850/0 of the country is vulnerable to single or multiple disasters and about 57% of
its area lies in high seismic zones. Approximately 40 million hectares of the country's land
area is prone to flood, about 80/0 of the total land mass is vulnerable to cyclone and 680/0
of the area is susceptible to drought. Some areas are also vulnerable to industrial, chemical
and biological disasters.
The magnitude of loss of human lives and livelihood in our country due to such disasters
is excessive by any modern standards.
II

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
According to a recent study by the World Bank, 2.25% of the GDP and 12.15% of the
revenue of the country were lost due to natural disasters during 1996-2000. This has
serious implications for macro-economic management and development planning.
Although the broad principles of crisis management are applicable to different types of
disasters, each disaster category has its peculiar features, which need to be factored in crisis
management efforts. A brief description of some major crises/disasters, which India faces
is given in the following paragraphs:
Earthquakes
In our present state of knowledge, earthquakes can neither be prevented nor predicted in
terms of their magnitude, or place and time of occurrence. Therefore, the most effective
measures ofr isk reduction are pre-disaster mitigation, preparedness and preventive measures
for reducing the vulnerability of the built environment combined with expeditious and
effective rescue and relief actions immediately after the occurrence of the earthquake.
Cyclones
An effective cyclone disaster prevention and mitigation plan requires: (i) efficient cyclone
forecast - and warning services; (ii) rapid dissemination of warnings to the government
agencies, particularly marine interests like ports, fisheries and shipping and to the general
public and (iii) construction of cyclone shelters in vulnerable areas, a ready machinery for
evacuation of people to safer areas and community preparedness at all levels to meet the
exigencies.
Floods
Floods occur regularly in India affecting about 100/0 of area. Assam and Bihar are the States
worst affected by floods followed by U.P. and West Bengal. However, during monsoon
months, all states are prone to floods, even Rajasthan! In many cases, the natural process of
flooding is aggravated by man-made hindrances to free out-flow/ absorption of floodwater
both in agricultural areas and particularly in urban areas with unplanned or unauthorized
construction activities. The country has to shift towards efficient management of floods,
disaster preparedness, response planning, flood forecasting and warning.
Landslides and Avalanches
The hilly terrains of India, particularly in the Himalayas and the Western Ghats, are most
vulnerable to landslides.

Crisis Management - From Despair to Hope
The sliding down of snow cover on mountain slopes causes avalanches. When the balance
between the gravitational force of snow cover and the resisting force of the slope and the
anchoring effect of shrubs are lost, avalanches are caused.
Industrial Disasters
Among the man made disasters, probably the most devastating (after wars) are industrial
disasters. The worst example globally was the Methyl Iso-cynate gas leak in 1984 from the
Union Carbide Factory in Bhopal which has so far claimed more than 20,000 lives and
injured severallakh persons. This disaster triggered a completely new legal regime and
practices for preventing such disasters.
After the Bhopal Gas Tragedy, a new chapter was inserted in the Factories Act, 1948
dealing with hazardous processes. The Environment Protection Act, 1986 was enacted.
More importantly, several Rules were promulgated under the Act. Important among them
are:
1. The Environment (Protection) Rules, 1986.
2. Hazardous Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 1989.
3. The Manufacture, Storage and Import of Hazardous Substances Rules, 19891
2000 (MSIHS).
4. The Public Liability Insurance Act and Rules and Amendment, 1992.
5. The Chemical Accidents (Emergency Planning, Preparedness, and Response)
Rules, 1996.
6. The Environment (Siting for Industrial Projects) Rules, 1999.
7. The Municipal Solid Wastes (Management and Handling) Rules, 2000.
8. The Ozone Depleting Substances (Regulation and Control) Rules, 2000.
Epidemics
In India, the major sources of epidemics can be broadly categorized as follows:
(a) Water-borne diseases like cholera (and forms of gastroenteritis), typhoid,
Hepatitis A, Hepatitis B etc - major epidemics of such diseases have been

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
recorded in the past and continue to occur; (b) Vector-borne (often mosquito
borne) epidemics like dengue fever, chikungunya fever, Japanese encephalitis,
malaria, kala-azar etc, which usually occur in certain regions of the country;
(c) Person to person transmission of diseases e.g. AIDS and other venereal
diseases; and (d) Air-borne diseases like influenza and measles that can also be
transmitted through fomites (used clothes etc.).
Nuclear Hazards
With increased emphasis on power generation through nuclear technology, the threat of
nuclear hazards has also increased. Nuclear facilities in India have adopted internationally
accepted guidelines for ensuring safety to the public and environment. A crisis management
system is also in place to take care of any nuclear hazard.
Desert Locusts
In the last century, there have been six plagues of Desert Locusts, one of which lasted
almost 13 years. Initial Desert Locust control efforts were largely curative but the trend in
the twentieth century had been toward preventing such plagues from occurring.
International cooperation lies at the core of an effective strategy for locust control. As a
result, locust management decisions are based on information gathered by and exchanged
with national agencies and international organizations that have developed programs to
regularly monitor locusts and the weather in the desert before they reach agricultural areas.
This strategy has proved to be quite effective.
Slow Onset Disasters
Climate change (global warming), desertification, soil degradation, and droughts, would
fall under the category of slow onset disasters. Slow onset disasters are also termed as
'Creeping Emergencies'. It may be added that with 'prevention' forming an integral part of
the 'management cycle', slow onset disasters like global warming, and desertification must
find adequate reflection in disaster preparedness.
Climate Change
Climate change is defined as 'a statistically significant variation in either the mean state
of the climate or in its variability, persisting for an extended period (typically decades or
even longer). Climate change may be due to natural internal processes or external forces,
or to persistent anthropogenic changes in the composition of the atmosphere or in land
II

Crisis Management - From Despair to Hope
use.' Global warming caused due to the "Greenhouse effect" is one of the major reasons
for climate change.
Droughts
Droughts refer to a serious shortfall in availability of water, mainly, but not exclusively, due
to deficiency of rains.
Droughts in India have their own peculiarities requiring appreciation of some basic facts.
These are:
• India has an average annual rainfall of around 1150 mm; no other country has
such a high annual average, however, there is considerable annual variation.
• More than 800/0 of rainfall is received in less than 100 days during the South-west
monsoon and the geographic spread is uneven.
• 21 % area receives less than 700 mm rains annually making such areas the hot
spots of drought.
• Inadequacy of rains coupled with adverse land-man ratio compels the farmers to
practice rain-fed agriculture in large parts of the country.
• Irrigation, using groundwater aggravates the situation in the long run as ground
water withdrawal exceeds replenishment; in the peninsular region availability of
surface water itself becomes scarce in years of rainfall insufficiency.
• Per capita water availability in the country is steadily declining.
• As against total annual availability 1953 km3, approximately 690 kms. of surface
water and 396 kms .. of from ground water resources can be put to use. So far, a
quantum of about 600 kms. has been put to use.
• The traditional water harvesting systems have been largely abandoned.
Desertification and Soil Degradation
Any kind of land degradation can be termed as desertification. This can take place due to
soil erosion, increasing alkalinity in soil and water-logging. Land degradation is estimated
to affect one third of the total area of the country.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Sea Erosion
About 23 per cent of India's mainland coastline of 5423 km is getting affected by erosion,
according to a survey.
Prevention measures against sea erosion include (i) sea walls, (ii) gabions, (iii) boulders,
(iii) revetments, (iv) steel piles, (iv) rock groynes and (v) offshore rock bars.
Crisis/Disaster Response Mechanism in India
Legal Framework
In India, recurrent crises in the form of widespread famines and locust invasions were
a common feature and to deal with these, various famine commissions were set up in
the 19th century and Famine Codes were developed. The entire crisis management
exercise was confined to fighting natural calamities. After Independence, drought relief
works were undertaken in areas affected by severe droughts. With the onset of the green
revolution in the late 1960s the necessity for famine relief work declined and a holistic
drought management programme was taken up in the form of the Drought Prone Areas
Programme (D PAP).
Legislation on disaster management at the national level was enacted in the year 2005 with
the Disaster Management Act, 2005. Several states had also passed their own legislation
on disaster management prior to the National Act.
The Response Mechanism
The community is usually the first responder in case of a disaster. Field level response on
behalf of the government in rural areas is by the nearest police station and the revenue
functionary in urban areas the response is articulated by agencies like the civic authorities,
the fire brigade and the local police station. Panchayats do not have the capacity to react
institutionally and it is the district administration, which retains the basic responsibility
of handling crises situations with the Collector playing a pivotal role.
The Indian Constitution has delineated specific roles for the Union and State Governments.
However, the subject of disaster management does not find mention in any of the three
lists in the Seventh Schedule of the Indian Constitution.
Role of State Government: In India the basic responsibility to undertake rescue,
relief and rehabilitation measures in the event of natural disasters rests with the State
Governments.

Crisis Management - From Despair to Hope
Every state has a Crisis Management Committee under the chairpersonship of the Chief
Secretary. At the ministers' level, a Cabinet Committee on Natural Calamities under the
chairpersonship of the Chief Minister takes stock of situations and is responsible for all
important policy decisions.
The District Magistrate/Collector has the responsibility for the overall management of
disasters in the district. He has the authority to mobilize the response machinery and has
been given financial powers to draw money under the provisions of the General Financial
Rules/Treasury Codes.
Role of Union Government: Although the State Government concerned has the primary
responsibility for crisis management, the Union Government plays a key supportive role
in terms of physical and financial resources and providing complementary measures such
as early warning and co-ordination of efforts of all Union agencies. At the apex level, a
Cabinet Committee on Natural Calamities reviews the crisis situations.
The Cabinet Secretary, as the highest executive officer, heads the National Crisis Management
Committee (NCMC). The NCMC can give directions to any ministry, department or
organization for specific action needed for meeting the crisis situation.
In view of the highly technical and specific nature of certain disaster events the ministries
dealing with that particular subject have the nodal responsibility for handling that particular
type of disaster.
Armed Forces: The Armed Forces, playa major role in assisting the civil administration
particularly in emergency support functions such as communications, search and rescue
operations, health and medical facilities, transportation, power, food and civil supplies,
public works and engineering.
Unification of Crisis Management: !he Disaster Management Act, 2005
The Union Government decided to formulate a comprehensive disaster management
legislation, providing for a legal and institutional framework of crisis management at all
levels in the country. The Disaster Management Bill was introduced in Parliament in May
2005 and finally enacted in December 2005. Sections 2 to 8, 10, 75, 77 and 79 of the
Act have been notified on 28th July, 2006. However the National Disaster Management
Authority was constituted by an Executive Order dated 28th September, 2005.
II

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
LEGAL AND INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK
Constitutional Provision - is there needf or a separate entry?
Due to the cross cutting nature of activities that constitute disaster management and the
vertical and horizontal linkages required which involve coordination between the Union,
State and local governments on the one hand and a host of government departments
and agencies on the other; setting up of a broadly uniform institutional framework at all
levels is of paramount importance. The legislative underpinning for such a framework
would need to ensure congruence and coherence with regard to the division of labour and
responsibilities among the agencies at the Union, State and other levels. This could best
be achieved if the subject of Disaster Management is placed in the Concurrent List of the
Constitution.
What should a law on crisis management provide?·
The legislation for disaster/crisis management needs to create agencies/ authorities at local/
district/ state and national levels. The responsibility and the authority assigned to each one
of these have to be distinct. National level planning, research, analysis and adoption of best
practices, development of standard operating procedures (national level), development
of training and capacity building programmes, administration of early warning systems
and .formulating policy on crisis/disaster management are best entrusted to a national
body. Local planning and the actual work of implementation are better left with State
Governments, local governments and the district administration with support from the
Union Government's implementing agencies.
Disaster! crisis management may require mobilization of resources and services. Such
resources and services may have to be requisitioned including from individuals and private
organizations. The law needs to empower authorities handling disasters to requisition such
resources for specified periods and the issue of compensation should not be a hindrance
in crisis management efforts.
A warning about a looming disaster, received well in time, can avert huge loss of human
lives. To ensure this, state-of-the-art early warning systems have to be meticulously
designed and installed. But even with a high degree of sophistication, the human element
is involved in the transmission process and any slippage due to carelessness could prove
disastrous. Prompt transmission of information, as prescribed under standard operating
procedures and instructions for transmission, should be made a statutory duty of each
concerned functionary. Responsibilities of citizens should also be appropriately provided
for in the law.
.1

Crisis Management - From Despair to Hope
Analysis oft he Disaster Management Act) 2005
The Disaster Management Act envisages a unified structure of disaster management in
the country; the integration of this institutional structure with the existing constitutional,
legal and administrative framework of the country may, however, pose several problems.
Under the Act, the NDMA and the NEC will not only approve the national plans and the
plans of the respective union ministries/departments; they will also lay down guidelines
for the state authorities, coordinate the enforcement and implementation of these policies
and plans for disaster management and ensure timely response. All these functions
traditionally have been performed by State Governments. What, in fact, is however needed
is further empowerment and delegation to the front-end functionaries when it comes to
implementation of disaster management efforts.
The Commission has considered the issues carefully from an administrative angle and is
of the view that the Disaster Management Act, 2005 requires substantial amendments to
ensure that it provides a coherent and practical framework for dealing with disasters at the
Union, State, District and local levels.
Institutional Framework
Institutional Framework at Apex Level
The High Powered Committee had observed that disaster! crises management needs full
political commitment at all levels of national, state and local government as cataclysmic
events sometimes assume the nature of national crisis involving the mobilization of
practic~ly the entire government at th~ highest level 25. The HPC had recommended that
an institutional mechanism needs to be created at the highest level by setting a Cabinet
Committee on Disaster Management that would ensure continued and sustained focus
on this area at the highest level of the government. The HPC also' recommended that the
All Party National Committee under the Chairmanship of the Prime Minister and the
Working Group set up under it, need to be institutionalized as permanent standing bodies
as the former would help generate the necessary political will, consensus and support,
while the latter, that is the Working Group, being a body of experts, will evolve appropriate
strategies for implementation of broad policy guidelines.
The Commission broadly agrees with the suggestions of the HPC that a Cabinet Committee
on Crisis Management be set up and notes that such a Committee has already been set up.
However, with the setting up of the National Disaster Management Authority, on the lines
proposed, the Working Group as recommended by the HPC may not be required.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Is There a Case for a Separate Ministry/Department ofD isaster/Crisis Management?
The Commission feels that given the multi-disciplinary nature of activities in cnSlS
management, creation of a separate ministry is likely to lead to conflict and delays rather
than coordination. For planning, research, capacity building and coordination of national
resources; such a coordination mechanism is now available with the formation of the
NDMA. And for the purposes of implementation, a coordination mechanism headed
by the Cabinet Secretary would be more effective. Therefore, the Commission is not in
favour of creation of a separate Ministry/Department at the national or the state level.
Coordination at the Apex Operational Level
The National Crisis Management Committee (NCMC) headed by the Cabinet Secretary
coordinates and guides the work of different departments of Government of India in
times of crisis. The NEC envisaged under the Disaster Management Act, 2005 would be
duplicating the role ofNCMC to a great extent. The NCMC has inherent advantages of
ensuring quick decisions and immediate implementation. If parallel bodies are created the
possibility of the pre-existing and newly formed committees trespassing on each other and
creating confusion and blurring of responsibilities during crisis situations cannot be ruled
out. Moreover, there is need to shift the focus from managing disasters to managing crises
and the NEC would not be in position to handle all types of crises. This problem would be
further compounded in case of multiple crises or disasters. Unity of command and quick
decision making are paramount in any crisis management situation. The Commission is
therefore of the view that NEC, as envisaged under the Disaster Management Act need not
be constituted and that the existing coordination mechanism under the Cabinet Secretary
should continue. Similarly, at the state level the existing coordination mechanism under
the Chief Secretary should be retained.
The Act also envisages establishment of a National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) , a
uniformed and highly trained quick response agency to respond to the needs of search
and rescue and to provide, on the spot, life-saving assistance to the victims. To a large
extent, this role has been admirably filled by our Armed Forces, in particular, the Army.
The lessons learnt from the devastating hurricane Katrina in the US is that extraordinarily
severe disasters could overwhelm specialized agencies and that in such situations the
Armed Forces remain the 'measure of last resort'. It is imperative that even after the
NDRF becomes fully functional, the 'enabling role' of the Armed Forces in assisting the
civil authorities be retained and the Armed Forces continue to maintain capabilities in
specialized search and rescue operations.

Crisis Management - From Despair to Hope
Role ofL ocal Self-Governments
Local self-governments, both rural and urban, have emerged as important tiers of
governance, after the 73rd and 74th Amendments to the Constitution. For the people, they
are also the nearest units of administration and are among the first responders to any crisis
besides being closely knit with the communities. These units can thus play an important
role in crisis management under the overall leadership of the District Administration.
With the enactment of a central legislation on the subject and the possibility that more
state level legislations will be forthcoming, State Governments would need to examine if
enabling, provisions need to be introduced in disaster management legislations or even
the municipal legislations to bring greater salience to the role of the municipal bodies in
responding to disasters.
Crisis Management Set Up for Metropolitan Cities
In major cities (say, with population exceeding 2.5 million), Municipal Corporations
have a large administrative system including departments like engineering, public health
and revenue, and sometimes fire services. These should provide a good mechanism for
coordinated response in case of any crisis/disaster. M,oreover, in cities where there is a
Police Commissioner system, the District Collector does not have as much a role as in
other districts. In such situations, District Disaster Management Authority prescribed by
the Disaster Management Act, 2005 may not be very suitable. In metropolitan cities it
is advisable to make the urban metropolitan government directly responsible for disaster
managemen t.
Bringing {{water" at the Centre Stage ofP olicy Domain
Two of the major types of disasters i.e. floods and droughts are primarily water related.
Without being exhaustive, attention may be invited to the following different policy
platforms:
• Ministry of Water Resources; Irrigation and Flood Control, Inter-State Basin
Issues etc.
• Department of Drinking Water Supply; Rural Water Supply.
• Ministry of Urban Development and Poverty Alleviation; Urban Water Supply.
• Ministry of Environment and Forests; Lakes, control of desertification/aridity.
II

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
• Ministry of Agriculture; Watershed Development/Droughts.
• Ministry of Rural Development; Water conservation in rural areas.
• Ministry of Science and Technology; Hydrology, Hydrogeology etc.
The long term interests of the country, including drought related concerns, will be better
addressed ifa ll the policy aspects and schemes with water, water conservation and improving
water availability as their primary focus are brought on a single policy platform.
Creation ofL egal and Institutional Framework for Managing Floods in Inter-State Rivers
Timely information of storage levels and inflows is not published and there is also
the tendency to retain water in the reservoirs until the levels reached are considered
dangerous. Sudden release of water leads to large scale flooding of downstream regions.
The National Commission for Integrated Development Plan for Water Resources (1999)
had recommended the constitution of inter-state river basin authorities. A beginning
should be made at least for the purpose collection of data, timely release of such data
and working out of agreed releases from reservoirs on reaching certain levels of storage.
Legislation needs to be enacted urgently by Parliament using the power under Entry 56 of
the Union List dealing with inter-state rivers.
Empowering the Relief Commissioners/Disaster Management Departments to Effectively
Discharge Disaster Related Responsibilities
The state level nodal points have to discharge onerous responsibilities. Such duties are more
demanding in case of droughts due to the much longer duration of the phenomenon. This
responsibility encompasses many spheres and the daunting task of rendering accounts. A
strengthening of the nodal point and establishment of an executing-coordinating agency
is imperative. This could be achieved by secondment of officers from related departments
to the State Disaster Management Authorities during a crisis.
Institutional Support ofS cience and Technology Institutions for Disaster Management
Towards strengthening the national response mechanisms, the Department ofS pace (DOS)
in the 10th Five Year Plan launched a Disaster Management Support (DMS) programme.
Other Science and Technology Departments have also drawn up similar major proposals.
It is advisable to provide a formal common platform to achieve synergy.

Crisis Management - From Despair to Hope
Strengthening ofN ational Institute ofD isaster Management (NIDM)
The National Institute of Disaster Management (NIDM) is a premier national organization
working for human resource development at national level in the area of disaster mitigation
and management. Certain steps are necessary to enable the institution to meet the
expectations with which it was established.
Professionalization ofD isaster Management
The 'best practices' in disaster management are the strategies and methods perfected by
several developed countries and India can take advantage from exposure to these practices. It
is, therefore, desirable that the possibility of bilateral agreements with foreign governments
for exchange of experiences and learning from their documentation and research efforts
be fully explored.
RISK REDUCTION
Enunciating a Policy Towards Crisis Management Which Emphasizes Risk Reduction
The ND MA has been mandated to lay down policies, plans and guidelines for disaster
management {Section 6(1) of the Disaster Management Act, 2005}. The Commission is
of the view that a national policy should reflect the paradigm shift in disaster management
from a short term to a long term perspective, from relief and rehabilitation to mitigation
and risk reduction, and from a government led approach to innovative partnerships
involving the community, civil society, corporate bodies and with a focus on women and
children who often bear the brunt of most disasters.
Assessment ofR isk - Hazard and Vulnerability Analysis
The entire landmass of India has been mapped for the three natural hazards, viz. earthquake,
cyclone (windstorm) and flood in a scale of 1 :2.5 million using the Survey of India maps
of the same scale as the base map. This map was published as Vulnerability Atlas of India
in 1998. This was followed up by preparing Vulnerability Atlases for each state in the same
scale covering these hazards. The census data of existing housing types were used to assess
the vulnerability of structures and to carry out district-wise risk analysis of housing units.
It is also possible to use the Geographical Information System (GIS) tools to integrate
various spatial data such as topography, hydrology, land use, land cover, settlement
pattern, built up structures etc and non-spatial data such as demography, socio-economic
conditions and infrastructure like road, rail network, communication system, hospital

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
etc. This can be further integrated with satellite and aerospace data and Geographical
Positioning System (GPS) for real time monitoring of crisis situation. This should be
taken up as a Plan scheme during the Eleventh Five Year Plan bringing all the scientific,
technological and research organizations such as NRSA, ISRO, NIC, GSI, NIDM and
other institutions together on a common platform for this purpose.
Generating Awareness about Risk
The mass media plays a very important role in spreading awareness about disasters. This
is an opportune time to carry out public awareness campaigns and use media to focus on
generating awareness about the risk the community is exposed to.
Details of past disasters need to be properly documented and kept in the public domain.
The District Disaster Management Authorities, the State Disaster Management Authorities
and the NDMA should have these details along with the lessons learnt, on their respective
web-sites.
Preparation ofD isaster Management Plans
The Disaster Management Act, 2005 visualizes the district plan as the one that lists out
the vulnerable areas in the district, the measures required for prevention and mitigation
of disasters, the capacity building and preparedness measures involved, the allocations of
responsibilities among the different district level departments, and the emergency response
mechanisms including communication systems, procurement of essential resources,
dissemination of information etc.
While the concept of the district plan as mentioned in the Act is quite comprehensive, it
should be understood that measures for prevention and mitigation of disasters are capital
intensive and usually cut across district boundaries. Therefore, the mitigation plan may
have a longer perspective ranging from 5-20 years. Disaster mitigation plans should also
incorporate a schedule of 'enforcement measures' and the functionaries who will be held
responsible for these. Such enforcement measures being 'unpleasant' and unpopular
are very often not contemplated leave aside acted upon. These measures could include
enforcement of building regulations in urban areas, removal of encroachments from natural
watercourses or environmentally fragile areas, and strict enforcement of environmental,
safety and public health regulations.
Therefore, the District Disaster Management Plan should have two components:
a. Long Term Disaster Management Plan.
II '
• L

Crisis Management - From Despair to Hope
b. Emergency Response Plan including a listing of 'standard operating
procedures' .
The Long Term Disaster Management Plan, in turn, should have the following parts:
a. Long Term Development Plan.
b. Long Term Enforcement Plan.
Making Crisis/Disaster Management Plans a Part ofD evelopment Plans
Long term disaster mitigation/prevention plans include major capital intensive activities
such as training ofw ater courses, construction of protective bunds, afforestation, plantation
of drought r~sistant vegetation, construction of shelters, raising embankments, retrofitting
of buildings, permanent relocation of vulnerable settlements etc, which can sometimes
have inter-district or even inter-state ramifications. Therefore, the long term plans may
have to encompass block, district, state and national.
Proper Environment Management
Environmental degradation and disasters constitute a vicious cycle. Development practices
that enhance the quality of environment would not only help in mitigating disasters but
could also build community resilience. Environment management must be factored into
all planning and development activities.
Hazard Reduction Measures
Construction ofM ajor Civil Engineering Structures
Structural measures are mainly engineering solutions to preven t disasters such as construction
of dams, diversion channels, flood protection walls, sea walls, cyclone shelters, shelterbelt
plantations and regeneration of mangrove belts in coastal areas etc.
Construction ofD isaster Resistant Dwellings and Public Use Buildings
Disaster resistant structures (dealt with here) seek to protect the people staying inside
them by withstanding the onslaught of the disaster or at least by remaining intact.
Construction of houses and other buildings is regulated through the mechanism ofb uilding
byelaws. These byelaws exist in major cities but are virtually non.:existent in the smaller
cities and rural areas. Even in areas where these byelaws exist, they generally regulate the
, I

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
total built up area in a housing or commercial unit and also specify the extent of land,
which can be used for construction. But they do not stipulate the construction standards
which have to be maintained.
The technology for construction of disaster resistant units exists and has been codified
by the Bureau of Indian Standards. The National Building Code of India (NBC) 2005, a
comprehensive building Code, is a national instrument providing guidelines for regulating
the building construction activities across the country. It serves as a Model Code for
adoption by all agencies involved in building construction.
Incorporation of the safety codes in the building byelaws would provide the necessary
legal framework.
Zoning regulations: These could be used to prevent settlements in hazard prone areas like
the riverbanks, which are flood prone, or areas near coasts, which are prone to cyclones,
or areas of extremely high seismic activity, or ecologically sensitive areas. These could also
be used to spread out the population so that impact of any hazard is limited. It would be
advisable if the hazard analysis is used as one of the important tools in preparing zoning
regulations for an area.
Non structural measures: These measures are in the form of capacity building and improved
livelihood practices. These include afforestation, scientific watershed management,
vegetative bunds, improved agricultural practices and relocation of habitations. All these
measures should be included in the long term disaster management plans.
Effective Implementation ofL aws and Regulations
Some of the major industrial disasters as well as seemingly natural disasters such as urban
floods are due to ineffective planning, poor enforcement of laws and toleration of flagrant
violations ofl aws over years. The Commission is of the view that special mechanisms have
to be evolved to ensure proper compliance and implementation of such laws. One option
may be to institute concurrent third party audit of all major alleged violations. Records
relating to such permissions must be brought in the public domain suo-motu.
Early Warning Systems
The last decade has seen major advances in technology relating to data capture, transmission,
analysis and even dissemination. Thus, the early warning phase of disaster management is
largely technology driven with satellite imagery, remote sensing, seismology, oceanography,
climatology etc providing vital inputs. But like most technologies there are last mile
rI·
I .. ..L 1

Crisis Management - From pespair to Hope
problems which make human intervention essential. It is important that the warning
reaches the most vulnerable sections in a manner that is understood by them. Therefore,
in spite of far reaching technological advances, mechanisms still have to be put in place to
suit the local conditions.
Building Community Resilience
Undertaking location specific training programmes for the community: Such programmes
should be a part of the disaster management plan. As the number of persons to be imparted
knowledge and skills is very large, a cascading approach should be followed.
Mainstreaming crisis management in education: Disaster management education needs to
be integrated and institutionalized within the formal and informal systems of education.
Mainstreaming crisis management in training programmes: Priority should be given to
training and capacity building of elected leaders and personnel in critical sectors like
police, revenue, agriculture, irrigation, health, public works etc.
Financial Tools for Risk Reduction
The two funding mechanisms are mainly for relief and rehabilitation efforts. While post
disaster funding is an important element of crisis management, excessive dependence on it
creates a regime where there are no incentives for adoption of risk reduction methods. The
HPC was of the opinion that insurance brings quality in infrastructure and a culture of
safety. However, low income populations coupled with low penetration by the insurance
companies poses a major challenge.
While the Commission would not go into the details of working out an insurance
framework for disaster management, it would strongly recommend that that the tool of
insurance be made attractive through a set of policy measures and fiscal incentives.
Research and Use ofK nowledge
The India Disaster Resource Network (IDRN) - a web enabled centralised data base
has been operationalised. Such databases can be useful if they are updated with correct
information periodically otherwise they may foster a false sense of security.
The research carried out by researchers and disaster management functionaries in the field is
often uncoordinated and, therefore, a national agenda to direct research in the desired field
is required. NIDM is best suited to c'arry out this task under the guidance ofNDMA.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
EMERGENCY RESPONSE SYSTEM
Emergency Pian
In crisis situations, the Emergency Response Plan should define the trigger point in
unambiguous terms so that there is no delay on the part of the role players to initiate
action as laid down in the plan. This would entail that the role players should have full
knowledge about the tasks each has to perform. The Emergency Response Plan should
also identifY resources, including human resources, logistics, specialized equipments and
the way to put them into action.
It has been observed that the District Emergency Response P~ans are not always up to the
mark. This is because 'crises' are considered low probability events and advance planning
does not receive the attention it deserves. The plans are more often than not, prepared on
assumptions (and not ground realities) and without intensive consultations with the role
players. They are also not updated from time to time. Such plans also remain on paper as
they are not backed by mock drills and the required building of teams and their capacity.
Coordinating Relief
The biggest task is to ensure that the resources are deployed in such a manner that they
reach all affected sections in an equitable manner. This calls for an effective coordination
mechanism at the district and sub-district levels. It needs to be ensured that the needs are
properly assessed and communicated to all agencies so that unwanted relief material is not
mobilized.
It has been observed that the focus of relief effort is on food, clothing and shelter and
aspects of public health and sanitation are often overlooked. Ensuring supply of safe water
and sanitized living conditions should receive as much priority as other items of relief
Total transparency should be followed in distribution and procurement of relief materials.
It is desirable to constitute vigilance committees of the community to keep a watch over
these activities and act as grievance redressal fora.
This ad-hoc procedure has several drawbacks. There is need to evolve objective methods of
assessing the damage so that there are no allegations of bias, distortions, exaggeration or
arbitrary scaling down. Satellite imagery could be used as a tool to validate the reported
damages and NDMA could draw up the necessary guidelines for the assessment teams.

Crisis Management - From Despair to Hope
Role of Specialized Agencies
Civil Defence
An examination of the powers vested in the Union Government to make rules reveals that
with very few amendments, the mandate of the Civil Defence Act can be extended to also
include crisis/disaster management. This could be achieved by inserting the term 'disasters'
in section 2(a) of the Civil Defence Act to give a wider meaning to the definition of 'civil
defence'.
The whole structure of 'civil defence' may be left at the disposal of the State Governments.
As the District Magistrate is also the authority charged with the responsibility of looking
after disaster management at the district level (both under the state and Union legislations
on disaster management), specific provisions may be inserted in the civil defence legislation
for making the powers of the District Magistrate co-terminous with those under the
Disaster Management Act, 2005 and allowing induction of members of civil defence corps
from the local community to make community participation an important ingredient of
crisis management at the district level.
The existing enrollment of about 6lakh volunteers is grossly inadequate for a vast country
like India. However, as a first step, efforts should be made to reach the target of 1 of the
%
population within 5 years.
The financial allocation for civil defence activities is very inadequate. The increase should
not be linked to any matching contribution from the states. The HPC had recommended
that donations from corporate sector should be permitted for civil defence activities. The
Commission agrees with this.
The Directorate of Civil Defence should be brought under the control of the State Crisis
Management set-up.
Police, Home Guards and Fire Services
The police are among the first responders in any cnSlS. It is essential therefore, that
policemen at field level who would be the first responders are sufficiently trained.
The role of Home Guards is to serve as an auxiliary to the police in the maintenance of
internal security, help the community in any kind of emergency such as an air-raid, fire,
cyclone, earthquake, epidemic, etc.
II
, I

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
In several 'state laws it is prescribed that the qualification of a person to be a Home Guard
should be 'Primary Pass'. This should be revised to at least a pass in the 10th class given the
increasing responsibility and complexity of tasks to be entrusted to them.
There is no uniform structure of Fire Services in the country. In some states they are
managed by the municipal authorities whereas in a few states, the police controls the
fire services but in a large number of states it is organized as a department,' with fire
stations spread allover the state. In most of the states the Fire Services are not supported
by legislation. There is an urgent need to train and equip the Fire Services to handle
all types of crisis/disasters in line with international best practices where they have been
modernized as multi-hazard forces. It would also be appropriate if they are renamed as
Fire and Rescue Services.
The Commission, feels that for bigger cities (population exceeding 2.5 million), Fire
Services should be totally under the control of the municipal authorities. In the remaining
parts of the state, the Fire Services should be organized as a department. However,
within a district, full operational control should be given to the District Crisis/Disaster'
Management Authority. In the long run, as the capabilities of municipal bodies are built
up, Fire Services may be transferred to them in a phased manner.
It would be better if the Fire and Rescue Services are structured under the Crisis/Disaster
Management Law. The law should inter-alia provide a mandate for dealing with all types
of crisis/disasters.
Setting up Integrated Emergency Operations Centre (EOC)
It would be even better if there is only one unified EOC at the national level with personnel
equipped and trained to handle information related to any type of crisis. If a ministry is
already running a control room, the same could be housed in this integrated EOC. Such
an integrated EOC could then be accessed by all agencies in the country or even by an
international agency to pass on any information about an impending crisis.
Organising Emergency Medical Relief
In India, the police and fire services are legally entrusted with specific duties and are
geared to respond to emergencies involving their intervention, subject to personnel and
infrastructure limitations. Public health infrastructure is grossly inadequate and generally
unsatisfactory whereas private health care is both costly and somewhat reluctant to deal
with emergency management given the medico-legal complications and absence of health
insurance coverage.
I •

Crisis Management - From Despair to Hope
In this backdrop, we need to create a legal and institutional framework throughout the
country to deal with emergencies - medical or others. A non-profit initiative called
EMRI has been established in Andhra Pradesh recently (in 2005), and is now providing
services to callers in 32 towns and cities and neighbouring areas. A phone number 108
has been reserved for emergencies, and the state agencies like the police and fire services
are increasingly collaborating with the private', non-profit initiative in receiving and sifting
calls, and responding to emergencies.
We may need a law dealing with emergency medical services in the private sector and
another law establishing an Indian Emergency Number Authority (lENA), dealing with
protocols regarding a toll-free number for emergency dialing and coordination among
various state and non-state agencies. A statutory authority may have to be created to
monitor emergency medical management. A viable and sustainable funding mechanism
may need to be evolved to make such a system work.
RECOVERY
Reliefa nd Rehabilitation
The ultimate objective of any crisis management is restoration ofd evastated livelihoods. This
restoration should not only encompass social, economic and psychological rehabilitation,
but go beyond by addressing the underlying cause of disaster.
The first step after stabilizing the situation by providing sufficient relief is to assess the
damage. This exercise is best carried out through multi-disciplinary teams which go into
all aspects of damage.
Establishing a framework for coordination is necessary for effective recovery. The role
of Voluntary Organisations including international ones like the Red Cross is extremely
useful for downscaling the impact of disaster.
A system of accountability needs to be evolved during the relief and rehabilitation phase.
This system should ensure that the relief material reaches the target groups and that the
funds are being utilized efficiently and optimally. A grievance redressal mechanism should
also be put in place.
After the recovery phase, it is necessary to conduct a detailed evaluation of all aspects of
crisis management. This should bring out the strengths and weaknesses of the disaster
management machinery and also provide the basis for future improvements. Such an
evaluation should be carried out by an independent professional agency through the
II
I
l ,

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
NIDM, in all major disasters. This evaluation should also include a quick audit of
the expenditure incurred.
The Disaster Management Act, 2005 envisages establishment of two funds, namely,
"National Disaster Response Fund" and "National Disaster Mitigation Fund".
Similar funds are also to be established at the State and District levels.
Long term mitigation measures, being capital intensive, have to be carried out as
part of the national plan or the state plan of the concerned Ministry/Department.
Modalities of integrating projects taken up under the Mitigation Fund and other'
projects taken up under different schemes would have to be worked out. NDMA
may be requested to finalise such modalities and also recommend guidelines for use
of the Mitigation Funds at the National, State and District levels. Similar guidelines
would also have to be worked out for the 'Response Fund'.
The quantum of assistance from these new funds for each state and its details and
conditions of release may be suggested by NDMA - on the basis of a transparent
criteria - rather than once in five years by the Finance Commission. It is desirable
that both the funds are made operatio~al from Aprill, 2007, with an initial annual
contribution of Rs 5000 crores each from the Government of India, in addition to
the CRF and N CCF, which may cease to exist at the end of the award period of the
Twelfth Finance Commission.
Experience of the manner in which the existing funds have been administered has
brought to light a number of anomalies. Some of these are:
(i) Delay in initiation of relief expenditure, particularly from the CRF in
case of droughts where states often wait for additional allocations from
the NCCF before commencing distribution of relief on the ground.
(ii) Absence of accounts for relief expenditure separately for a calamity
under 'each head of relief'; at present annual accounts are compiled on
'over-all' basis.
(a) Lack of transparency about the basis on which assistance from the
N CCF is sanctioned.
(b) Absence of concurrent evaluation of relief efforts - this leads,
among other things, to allegations of misuse and partisanship,
with or without justification.
II

Crisis Management - From Despair to Hope
GENDER ISSUES AND VULNERABILITY OF WEAKER SECTIONS
It has been noted that women and children are the most adverse~y affected in disasters,
particularly natural disasters, and consequently suffer the most.
It is, therefore, necessary that all disaster management policies/plans including disaster
preparedness and mitigation relief and rescue operations specially address the vulnerability
of both women and children during disasters. This would necessitate involving women
in all disaster preparedness and mitigation plans. The same principles apply to other
vulnerable sections like the children, the elderly and the physically challenged.
DROUGHT~AGEMENT
Revisiting Long Term Interventions
It is noteworthy that while the net irrigated area which was 20.85 million hectares in
1950-51 rose to 53.07 million hectares in 2002-03 (representing an increase of more than
150%), the corresponding decline in areas vulnerable to repeated droughts has been no
more than 200/0.
A long term impediment in understanding the causes (and remedies) for occurrence of
droughts is the absence of integrated expertise in water. The diverse 'water centered' expertise
scattered in such institutions is currently difficult to be integrated. The Commission
therefore feels that a National Institute of Drought Management should be set up.
Livelihood Management in Extremely Drought Prone Areas
Areas suffering repeated droughts over the millennia have highly degraded land resources.
There are, however, areas where deep attachment to agriculture tends to dissuade frequently
drought affected communities from. looking at ecologically more compatible livelihoods.
There are aspects which need to be addressed urgently to mitigate frequent crises which
result from 'unsustainable agriculture'.
Codifications ofM anagement Methodologies
Many developments in the last half a century or so have made considerable difference
to the way droughts are diagnosed and handled. Chief among them are powerful tools
like satellite imagery, long term forecast of Monsoons and discovery of sophisticated
determinants of the movement of the Monsoon. Over-exploitation of ground-water and
extension of surface irrigation from 'non-snow melt sources' (particularly in the peninsular
•

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
region), crop diversification from coarse grains to cash crops and availability of a wide
variety of alternate crops are important developments with a bearing on occurrence and
management of droughts - these do not find place in the manuals. A related matter is the
advances made in respect of other natural disasters, notably cyclones and floods - often
the guiding document remains the same Relief Code. The Commission therefore feels that
these Codes need to be re-written keeping in view the latest developments.
Rationalization ofD rought Declarations
The Commission is of the view that the drought declaration process needs to be rationalized
and made uniform in all states. It would not be appropriate to base such declaration upon
the crop yields as it delays the commencement of drought relief measures. Therefore, the
declaration would have to be based upon an estimate of the cropped area. To begin with,
these would have to be eye estimates. With advances in satellite imagery, these estimates
could be corroborated and ultimately the entire exercise could be based on remote
sensing. These could be finalized in consultation with the states and under the guidance
ofNDMA. .
Deployment ofR emote SensingJor Diagnosis and Prognosis ofD rought Situations
Remote sensing has not yet been dovetailed in the routine institutional framework. A
workable, indicative, model would involve positioning of technical personnel of the
National Remote Sensing Agency (NRSA) at the District level.
Making Rivers Perennial
Irrigatiot:J. systems based on perennial rivers retain their efficacy even during severe droughts
while there is, at times, a total collapse of this system in areas served by seasonal streams.
The Commission feels that this neglected aspect deserves much greater attention and
approaches and methodologies for achieving it need to be standardized and evaluated.
Technical agencies under the Ministries of Water Resources, Environment and Forests
and Science and Technology should immediately carry out river specific feasibility studies
to determine the ecological and hydrological implications of this approach in different
habitats.
RaznJed Areas Authority
The Commission understands that the constitution of a National Rainfed Areas Authority
is under active consideration and the Authority can deal inter alia, with the above aspects
fI

Crisis Management - From Despair to Hope
and also the formation of National Institute of Drought Management referred to earlier.
MANAGEMENT OF SPECIFIC CRISIS SITUATIONS
(EPIDEMICS AND DISRUPTION OF ESSENTIAL SERVICES)
Epidemics
The Public Health Emergency Bill is currently being considered by the Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare in the light of responses of the State Governments and other agencies.
There is a provision for the Union or State Governments to declare a particular area as
'epidemic or bio-terrorism affected'. Upon such declaration, action can be initiated under
the provisions which apart from measures like inspection and quarantine etc., also seeks to
empower government to prohibit activities which lead to or are likely to lead to epidemics
or bio-terrorism.
The Commission would like to note that a comprehensive, well planned public health
system is the most dependable bulwark against epidemics-related crises and to deal
with such crises, should they arise despite preventive measures. In this connection the
Commission notes the efforts to develop a model indicative Public Health Bill and strongly
recommends its early finalization with the hope that State Governments will move speedily
for its enactment.
The Commission also notes that the enactment of the Public Health Emergencies Bill is
now proceeding satisfactorily in the light of the feedback received from the States.
It is clear that management of epidemics-related crisis would also fall within the jurisdiction
of the National Disaster Management Authority and that apart from the legislation being
contemplated by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, it will be imperative that the
planning and preparatory exercises envisaged in the Disaster Management Act, 2005 are
also undertaken.
Disruption ofE ssential Services
The life of citizens depends on a wide range of essential. services like power, transport,
teleco~munications and drinking water supply. It has been observed that often during
natural disasters such essential services are severely hit. While drawing up disaster
management plans these types of crises should not be lost sight of.
fI

ETHICS IN GOVERNANCE
Introduction
Ethics is a set of standards that society places on itself and which helps guide behaviour,
choices and actions. Standards do not, by themselves, ensure ethical behaviour; which
requires a robust culture of integrity. The crux of ethical behaviour does not lie only in
standards, but in their adoption in action and in sanctions against their violations.
In-our society, corruption and abuse of office have been aggravated by three factors.
First, there is a colonial legacy of unchallenged authority and propensity to exercise
power arbitrarily. Second, there is enormous asymmetry of power. Nearly 900 /0 of our
people are in the unorganized sector. And nearly 700/0 of the organized workers with job
security and regular monthly wage are employed by the state directly or through public
sector organisations. Such asymmetry of power reduces societal pressure to conform to
ethical behaviour. Third, as a conscious choice, the Indian state in the early decades after
Independence chose a set of policies whose unintended consequence was to put the citizen
at the mercy of the State. Over regulation, severe restrictions on economic activity, excessive
state control, near-monopoly of the government in many sectors and an economy of scarcity
all created conditions conducive to the spread of corruption.
It is generally recognized that monopoly and discretion increase corruption while
competition and transparency reduce it. This has been witnessed in India in the wake of
liberalization in many sectors, though new forms of corruption do arise.
The more remotely power is exercised from the people, the greater is the distance between
authority and accountability. For a large democracy, India probably has the smallest number
of final decision makers.
In the ultimate analysis~ the state and a system of laws exist in order to enforce compliance
and promote desirable behaviour. Therefore, increased compliance with law in the Society,
enforce~ent of rule oflaw and deterrent punishment against corruption are critical to build
an ethically sound society.
II

Ethics in Governance
Perhaps the most important determinant of the integrity of a society or the prevalence of
corruption is the quality of politics. If politics attracts and rewards men and women of
integrity, competence and passion for public good, then the society is safe and integrity
is maintained. But if honesty is incompatible with survival in politics, and if public life
attracts undesirable and corrupt elements seeking private gain, then abuse of authority and
corruption become the norm.
Ethics in governance, however, has a much wider import than what happens in the different
arms of the government. Such an effort needs to include corporate ethics and ethics in
business; in fact, there should be a paradigm shift from the pejorative 'business ethics' to
'ethics in business'. There is need for ethics in every profession, voluntary organization and
civil society structure as these entities are now vitally involved in the process of governance.
Finally, there should be ethics in citizen behaviour because such behaviour impinges directly
on ethics in government and administration.
The Report deals with this vital subject in this wider sense and comprises analysis and
suggestions regarding ethics in politics, civil service and judiciary; the need for changes in
laws on anti-corruption, etc. etc.
ETHICAL FRAMEWORK
Ethics and Politics
Introduction
While it is unrealistic and simplistic to expect perfection in politics in an ethically imperfect
environment, there is no denying the fact that the standards set in politics profoundly
influence those in other aspects of governance. Excesses in elections (in campaign-funding,
use of illegitimate money, quantum of expenditure, imperfect electoral rolls, impersonation,
booth-capturing, violence, inducements and intimidation), floor-crossing after elections to
get into power and abuse of power in public office became major afflictions of the political
process over the years. Political parties, governments and more importantly the Election
Commission and the Supreme Court have taken several steps since the late 1980s yet much
more needs to be done to cleanse our political system.
Criminalization of politics - 'participation of criminals in the electoral process' - is the soft
underbelly of our political system. Flagrant violation of laws, poor quality of services and
the corruption in them, protection for law-breakers o~ political, group, class, communal or
caste grounds, partisan interference in investigation of crimes and poor prosecution of cases,
•
inordinate delays lasting over years and high costs in the judicial process, mass withdrawal

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
of cases, indiscriminate grant of parole, etc., are the more important of the causes. The
opportunity to influence crime investigations and to convert the policemen from being
potential adversaries to allies is the irresistible magnet drawing criminals to politics. The
elected position and the substantial protection that it can give, helps him either to further
and expand his activities or to evolve into an entity with higher political ambitions. As for
political parties, such individuals bring into the electoral process, their ability to secure
votes through use of money and muscle power.
This is a short-term win-win situation for all, except for public good and good governance.
All this has not taken place everywhere, but to the extent that it did, it led to a situation
when the Election Commission formally stated that one in six legislators in India faced
grave criminal charges.
Large, illegal and illegitimate expenditure In elections is another root cause of
corruption.
Abnormal election expenditure has to be recouped in multiples to sustain the electoral cycle!
Cleansing elections is the most important route to improve ethical standards in politics, to
curb corruption and rectifY mal administration.
Recent Improvements
Despite all the flaws in the functioning of a democracy, it has a measure of self correction.
A number of measures have been taken by the Election Commission and some j~dgements
of the Supreme Court have also led to new laws being enacted.
Issues in Political Reforms
Despite the measures taken, the improvements are marginal as regards important problems
of criminalization, the use of money in elections, subtle forms of inducements and patronage
in the form of chairmanships and memberships of public units and the anomaly oflegislators .
functioning as disguised executives.
In order to eradicate one of the major sources of political corruption, there is·a compelling
case for state funding of elections. As recommended by the Indrajit Gupta Committee oil
State Funding of Elections, the funding should be partial state funding mainly in kind for
certain essential items.
The Election Commission has recommended that the question of disqualification of
members on the ground of defection should also be decided by the President/Governor
fI

Ethics in Governance
on the advice of the Election Commission. Such an amendment to the law seems to be
unfortunately necessary in the light of the long delays seen in some recent cases of obvious
defection.
There is need for a fair reconciliation between the candidate's right to contest and the
community's right to good representation. On balance, in cases of persons facing grave
criminal charges framed by a trial court after a preliminary enquiry, disallowing them to
represent the people in legislatures until they are cleared of charges seems to be a fair and
prudent course. But care must by exercised to ensure that no political vendetta is involved
in such charges. It also seems reasonable to disqualify persons facing corruption charges,
provided the charges have been framed by a judge/magistrate after prima facie evidence.
The Election Commission has suggested that as a precaution against motivated cases, it
may be provided that only cases filed six months before an election would lead to such
disq ualification.
The ethics of coalition government is, seriously strained when the coalition partners change
partnerships mid-stream and new coalitions are formed, primarily driven by opportunism
and craving for power in utter disregard of the common minimum programme agreed to
the common programme, which has been explicitly mandated by the electorate prior to
the election, or implicitly after the election but before the formation of the government,
becomes non-existent. To maintain the will of the people, it is necessary to lay down an
ethical framework to ensure that such exercises in opportunism, through redrawing of
coalitions between elections, do not take place.
Appointment oft he ChiefE lection Commissioner/Commissioners
In recent times, for statutory bodies such as the National Human Rights Commission
(NHRC) and the Central Yigilance Commission (CYC) , appointment of Chairperson and
Members are made on the recommendations of a broad based Committee.
Given the far reaching importance and critical role of the Election Commission in the working
of our democracy, it would certainly be appropriate if a similar collegium is constituted for
selection of the Chief Election Commissioner and the Election Commissioners.
Expediting Disposal ofE lection Petitions
The Commission is of the view that given the huge existing case load in the High Courts, it
would be possible to ensure speedy disposal of election petitions only by setting up Special
Tribunals as provided for under Article 323B of the Constitution.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Grounds ofD isqualification for Membership
While sub-sections (a) to (d) of Article 102 of the Constitution list the grounds for
disqualification, sub-section (e) empowers Parliament to pass any law to include further
conditions for such disqualification. So far, no such law has been enacted. In view of recent
development leading to expulsions of some Members of Parliament, it may be desirable to
comprehensively spell out other circumstances under which the Members of Parliament
can be disqualified.
Ethical Framework for Ministers
Government of India has prescribed a Code of Conduct which is applicable to Ministers
of both the Union and State Governments.
The Code of Conduct is a starting point for ensuring good conduct by Ministers. However,
it is not comprehensive in its coverage and is more in the nature of a list of prohibitions; it
does not amount to a Code of Ethics. It is therefore necessary that in addition to the Code
of Conduct, there should be a Code of Ethics to provide guidance on how Ministers should
uphold the highest standards of constitutional and ethical conduct in the performance of
their duties. The Code should be based on the overarching duty of Ministers to comply with
the law, to uphold the administration of justice and to protect the integrity of public life. It
should also lay down the principles of minister-civil servant relationship. The Commission
has examined the code of conduct in other countries and is of the view that a Code of
Ethics and a Code of Conduct for Ministers should include the following:
a. Ministers must uphold the highest ethical standards;
b. Ministers must uphold the principle of collective responsibility;
c. Ministers have a duty to Parliament to account, and be held to account, for
the policies, decisions and actions of their departments and agencies;
d. Ministers must ensure that no conflict arises, or appears to arise, between their
public duties and their private interests;
e. Ministers in·t he Lok Sabha must keep separate their roles as Minister and
constituency member;
f. Ministers must not use government resources for party or political purposes;
they must accept responsibility for decisions taken by them and not merely
blame it on wrong advice.

Ethics in Governance
g. Ministers must uphold the political impartiality of the Civil Service and not
ask civil servants to act in any way, which would conflict with the duties and
responsibilities of civil servants;
h. Ministers must comply with the requirements which the two Houses of
Parliament lay down from time to time;
1. Ministers must recognize that misuse of official position or information is
violation of the trust reposed in them as public functionaries;
j. Ministers must ensure that public moneys are used with utmost economy and
care;
k. Ministers must function in such a manner as to serve as instruments of good
governance and to provide s"ervices for the betterment of the public at large
and foster socio-economic development; and
1. Ministers must act objectively, impartially, honestly, equitably, diligently and
in a fair and just manner.
Enforcement ofE thical Norms in Legislatures
While the enunciation of ethical values and codes of conduct puts moral pressure on public
functionaries, they need to be backed by an effective monitoring and enforcement regime.
Legislatures the world over have adopted different models for this purpose. The Canadian
Conflict of Interest and Post-Employment Code for public office holders (2006) relies on an
Ethics Commissioner to oversee the Code and to provide advice. The Ethics Commissioner
is an Officer of Parliament appointed under Section 72.01 of the Parliament of Canada Act.
The Commissioner reports on the inquiries he conducts pursuant to the Members' Code and
makes annual reports to the House of Commons on his activities in relation to its Members.
Based on the recommendations of the Nolan Committee, the House of Commons in U.K.
has established the office of Parliamentary Commissioner for Standards. The constitution of
the Office of Parliamentary Commissioner for Standards has helped the House by bringing
greater transparency in matters relating to ethical standards. It has also helped the Members
by providing them timely advice in matters relating to the Code of Conduct.
The Commission is of the view that both Houses of Parliament may consider creation of
a similar office. It is envisaged that this Office would function under the Speaker. It could
also assist the Ethics Committee in the discharge of its functions, provide advice to the
Members when required and maintain records.
II

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Office ofP rofit
There is need to re-examine the definition of office of profit. Articles 102 and 191 of the
Constitution relating to office of profit have been violated in spirit over the years even
when the letter is adhered to. Each time a legislator is appointed by the executive to an
office which might be classified an office of profit, a law is enacted including that office in
the list of exempted categories.
Often, the crude criterion applied is whether or not the office carries a remuneration. In the
process, the real distinction of whether executive authority is exercised in terms of decision
making or direct involvement in deployment of public funds is often lost sight of
Several constitutional experts and legal luminaries have pointed out the unconstitutionality
of the MPLADS and MLALADS schemes. Apart from infringing on the rights of the local
governments, the most serious objection to the scheme is the conflict of interest that arises
when legislators take up executive roles.
Therefore it seems necessary to sharply define office of profit to ensure clearer separation
of powers.
Given these circumstances, it would be appropriate to amend the law on the following
lines:
• All offices in purely advisory bodies where the experience and insights of a legislator
would be inputs in governmental policy will not be treated as offices of profit,
irrespective of the remuneration and perks associated with such an office.
• All offices involving executive decision making and control of public funds,
including positions on the governing boards of public undertakings and statutory
and non-statutory authorities directly, deciding policy or managing institutions or
authorizing or approving expenditure shall be treated as offices of profit, and no
legislator shall hold such offices. (Discretionary funds at the disposal oflegislators
or the power to determine specific projects and schemes, or select the beneficiaries
or authorize expenditure shall constitute discharge of executive functions and will
invite disqualification under Articles 102 and 191, irrespective of whether or not
a new office is notified and held).
• If a serving Minister, by virtue of office, is a member or head of certain organizations
like the Planning Commission, where close coordination and integration between
the Council of Ministers and the organization or authority or committee is vital
II

Ethics in Governance
for the day-to-day functioning of government, it shall not be treated as office of
profit.
The Supreme Court has held that members of legislatures are public servants under the
Prevention of Corruption Act. The Commission feels that Members of Parliament and the
Members of State Legislatures should be declared as 'Public Authorities' under the Right
to Information Act except when they are discharging legislative functions.
Code ofE thics for Civil Servants
The code of behaviour as enunciated in the Conduct Rules, while containing some general
norms like 'maintaining integrity and absolute devotion to duty' and not indulging in
'conduct unbecoming of a government servant', is generally directed towards cataloguing
specific activities deemed undesirable for government servants. There is no Code of Ethics
prescribed for civil servants in India although such codes exist in other countries. What we
have in India are several Conduct Rules, which prohibit a set of common activities. These
Conduct Rules do serve a purpose, but they do not constitute a Code of Ethics. There is, of
late, a concern that more 'generic norms' need to be added to the list of accepted conduct. In
this context, conflict of interest is an important area which should be adequately addressed
in these codes.
After the 73rd and the 74th Amendments of the Constitution, the local bodies now have
an important role to play in the nation's development and have major executive powers. It
is essential that the need for relevant codes for these bodies and their employees, and for
any public authority, is recognized.
The Commission is of the view that there should be a set of Public Service Values which
should be stipulated by law. There should be a mechanism to ensure that civil servants
constantly aspire towards these values.
The Commission feels that the prevailing practice of nominating serving officers on the boards
of public sector bodies may compromise with the desired objectivity and independence
necessary for decision making in these bodies. It would be unrealistic and imprudent for
an official to sit in judgement of a decision taken by a Board of which he is a Member.
Code ofE thics for Regulators
In spite of the existence of a plethora of Codes of Conduct for almost all important
professions, it is often pointed out that adherence to ethical norms has been generally
unsatisfactory. Decline in ethical values in the professions has adversely impacted on the

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
governance of the country and is an important reason for increasing corruption in public
life. The Commission feels that there should be a Code of ~thics and a comprehensive
and enforceable Code of Conduct for all major professions. The role of external regulators
would also increase as government's functions are thrown open. In such cases, prescribing
et~ical norms for the regulators themselves as well as for the service providers would become
essential.
Ethical Framework for the Judiciary
The issue of appointment and removal of judges was examined by the National Commission
to Review the Working of the Constitution. The Commission recommended the constitution
of a National Judicial Commission which would have the effective participation of both
the executive and the judicial wings of the State "as an integrated scheme for the machinery
for appointment of judges".
A National Judicial Council should be constituted in line with universal practice to ensure
greater judicial accountability. The composition of the Council needs to be broad based,
and its powers enhanced so that it can exercise the necessary oversight of the judiciary.
The Commission is of the considered view that appointment of juages in higher courts
should be with the participation of the executive, legislature and the Chief Justice and it
should be a bipartisan process above day-to-day politics. Therefore, the proposed National
Judicial Council should comprise representatives of all three organs of State - the legislature,
the judiciary and the executive. Such a body can devise its own procedures in identifying
and screening the candidates for the higher judiciary.
The Commission is also of the considered view that the NJC should be entrusted with the
responsibility of recommending removal of judges of higher courts. Such recommendations
should be binding on the President, and Articles 124 and 217 of the Constitution should
be amended accordingly. This revised procedure for removal of judges is necessitated by
the failure of the impeachment process in India.
LEGAL FRAMEWORK FOR FIGHTING CORRUPTION
The Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988
Defining Corruption
The Prevention of Corruption Act does not provide a definition of 'Corruption'.
II

E~hics in Governance
Experience of the past decades shows that an indirect definition of corrupt practices is
paradoxically restrictive and a whole range of official conduct, detrimental to public
interest, is not covered by strong penal provisions. In particular, there are four types of
official conduct which cause immense damage to public interest, which do not explicitly
constitute violation of criminal law.
The first and possibly the most important of these is gross perversion of the Constitution
and democratic institutions, including, wilful violation of the oath of office.
The second such class of offences is abuse of authority unduly favouring or harming someone,
without any pecuniary consideration or gratification.
Third, obstruction or perversion of justice by unduly influencing law enforcement agencies
and prosecution is a common occurrence in our country.
Finally, squandering public money, including ostentatious official life-styles, has become
more common.
There is therefore need for classifying the following as offences under the Prevention of
Corruption Act:
• Gross perversion of the Constitution and democratic institutions amounting to
willful violation of oath of office
• Abuse of authority unduly favouring or harming someone
• Obstruction of justice
• Squandering public money
Collusive Bribery
The Commission is of the view that 'collusive' corruption, which is widespread, needs to
be dealt with by effective and subject legal measures so that both the bribe-giver and the
bribe-taker do not escape punishment. The punishment for collusive corruption should
be made more. In cases of collusive corruption, the 'burden of proof' should be shifted to
the accused.
Sanction for Prosecution
Section 19 of the Prevention of Corruption Act provides that previous sanction of the
competent authority is necessary before a court takes cognizance of the offences defined
II

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
under Sections 7, 10, 11, 13 and 15 of the Act. The objective of this provision is to prevent
harassment to honest public servants through malicious or vexatious complaints.
Dispensing with sanction in cases where public servants have been trapped red-handed
or in cases of possessing assets disproportionate to their known sources of income. Such
a protection is not required for offences which are basically based on the direct evidence
of:
i. Demand or/and acceptance of bribes,
ii. Obtaining valuable things without or with inadequate consideration, and
iii. Cases of possession of assets disproportionate to the known source of
income.
Therefore, there is a case for excluding the protection given in the above mentioned
circumstances.
The Commission feels that there is need for amending the Prevention of Corruption Act
to ensure that sanctioning authorities are not summoned as witnesses and if a trial court
desires to summon the sanctioning authority, it should record the reasons for doing so.
This should be at the first stage, even before framing of charges by the court.
The Commission is of the view that the Authority for according sanction for prosecution
under Section 19 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, should be stipulated in case of elected
representatives. This Authority, in case of Members of Parliament should be the Speaker or
Chairman, as the case may be. A similar procedure may be adopted by State Legislatures.
Protection to those persons who have ceased to be public servants at the time of taking
cognizance of the offence by the court.
The interpretation given by the courts in such cases may lead to a situation where a person
who superannuates, or resigns from service would not get the protection of this provision, .
even if the alleged offence was committed while he/she was in service. Therefore, the la~
should be amended so that retired public servants can also get the same level of protection,
as a serving public servant.
Expediting sanctions: The Commission is of the view that the procedure for granting
sanction, where government is the competent authority, needs to be streamlined so that
there is no delay in processing such cases. The Commission would like to recommend that
II

Ethics in Governance
at the level of the Union Government, the sanction for prosecution should be processed
by an Empowered Committee consisting of the Central Vigilance Commissioner and the
Departmental Secretary to Government. In case of a difference of opinion between the two,
it could be resolved by placing the subject before the full Central Vigilance Commission.
In case, sanction is sought against a Secretary to Government, the Empowered Committee
would comprise the Cabinet Secretary and the Central Vigilance Commissioner.
Liability of Corrupt Public Servants to Pay Damages
The Commission is of the view that in cases where public servants cause loss to the State
or citizens by their corrupt acts, they should be made liable to make good the loss so
caused, and in addition, should be made liable for damages. It should also be ensured that
adequate safeguards are provided so that bona fide mistakes should not end in award of
such damages, otherwise public servants would be discouraged from taking decisions in a
fair and expeditious manner.
Speeding up Trials under the Prevention of Corruption Act:
The Commission feels that there is need to fix a time limit for various stages of trial in
corruption cases. This could be done through an amendment to the CrPC. More importantly,
the existing provisions for conducting trials on a day-to-day basis should be meticulously
adhered to.
Corruption Involving the Private Sector
In India, the Companies Act, 1956 provides the statutory framework which governs the
internal processes of a Company. In case of non-compliance, the penal provisions are
invoked against the Company and its officers in default. Though the offence of corruption
or bribery is not specified under the Companies Act, 1956, instances of wrong doing by
Companies and their officers are addressed through the mechanis~s ofA ccounts and Audit
(Section 211), Inspection under Section 209A, Technical Scrutiny of Balance Sheet (Section
234), Investigation under Section 235/237 or Section 247, special audit under Section
233A, reference to Company Law Board (CLB) under Section 388B etc. The Commission
feels that corruption in the private sector should be addressed by effective enforcement of
'Regulations on Corporate Governance'.
The Commission is further of the view that corruption within the private sectQr should be
tackled through the effective enforcement of existing laws and regulations. Bringing the
activities of the entire private sector within the fold of the Prevention of Corruption Act
is neither desirable nor practical.
l I

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
The Commission is of the view that for confiscation of the property of a public servant
convicted for possession of disproportionate assets, the law should shift the burden of proof
to the public servant who is convicted. The presumption, in such cases, should be that the
disproportionate assets found in the possession of the public servant were acquired by him
though corrupt means and a proof of preponderance of probability should be sufficient
for confiscation of property.
Prohibition of 13enami' Transactions
The Benami Transactions (Prohibition) Act, 1988 was passed in 1988. The Act precludes
the person who acquired the property in the name of another person from claiming it as
his own.
Unfortunately, even now Rules have not been prescribed by the government with the result
that the government is not in a position to confiscate properties acquired by the real owner
in the name of his benamidars. Strict enforcement of the Benami Transactions (Prohibition)
Act, 1988, could unearth such properties and make property accumulation difficult for
corrupt officers and also work as a deterrent for others. The Rules have, therefore, to be
framed without further delay.
Protection to Whistleblowers
The Law Commission in its 179th Report has· proposed a. Public Interest Disclosure
(Protection of Informers) Bill, which provides protection to whistleblowers. The Bill has
provisions for providing safeguards to the whistleblowers against victimization in the
organization. It also has a provision that the whistleblower may himself seek transfer in
case he apprehends any victimization in the current position. In order to ensure protection
to whistleblowers, it is necessary that immediate legislation may be brought on the lines
proposed by the Law Commission.
Serious Economic Offences
Economic Offences, called frauds in common parlance (the term itself has been defined
in the Indian Contract Act47) have become a matter of concern because of an increasing
trend both in terms of size and complexity.·T his worrying trend has its roots in the rapid
pace at which the Indian economy is growing and the financial sector is diversifying .
.I t is generally felt that the punishment provided under the existing laws is not enough of
• a deterrent; as a result these offences have become a high gain low risk activity.
••'

Ethics in Governance
The Mitra Committee Report (The Report of the Expert Committee on Legal Aspects
of Bank Frauds 2001) submitted to the Reserve Bank of India pointed out that criminal
jurisprudence in India based on proof beyond doubt was too weak an instrument to
control bank frauds. The Committee recommended a two-pronged strategy for systemic
reforms through strict implementation of Regulator's Guidelines and obtaining compliance
certificates. Second, a punitive approach by defining scams as a serious· offence with the
burden of proof shifting to the accused and with a separate investigative authority for serious
frauds, and special courts and prosecutors for trying such cases was recommended.
The Commission is of the view that the current provisions in the Banking Regulation Act,
1949; SEBI Act, 1992 and the Companies Act, 1956 are not strong enough to prevent
large scale fraudulent practices nor are they deterrent enough.
There is need to define 'Serious Economic Offence' under a statute and prescribe deterrent
punishment for it. The complex and multi-disciplinary nature of 'Serious Economic
Offences' would require the constitution of an empowered body to investigate and prosecute
the cases under all such offences. This would require the establishment of a new and
adequately empowered Serious Frauds Office (SFO) which would, necessarily, subsume the
existing SFIO. The Serious Frauds Office thus constituted should be under the control and
supervision of a Serious Frauds Monitoring Committee chaired by the Cabinet Secretary
with representatives from the financial sector, capital and futures markets, commodity
markets, accountancy, direct and indirect taxation, forensic audit, criminal and company
law, investigation and information technology.
As getting conviction for economic offences under the existing laws is difficult and since
these offences, often generate funds for other organized crimes and terrorist activities, the
Commission agrees with the suggestion made by the Mitra Committee that for 'Serious
Frauds' the Court may presume the existence of mens rea.
Prior Concurrence for Registration of Cases: Section 6A of the Delhi Special Police
Establishment Act, 1946
The Commission on balance is of the view that it would be necessary to protect honest civil
servants from undue harassment, but at the same time in order to ensure that this protection
is not used as a shield by the corrupt, it would be appropriate if this permission is given
by the Central Vigilance Commissioner in consultation with the Secretary to Government
concerned and if the Secretary is involved, a committee comprising the Central Vigilance
Commissioner and the Cabinet Secretary may consider the case for granting of permission.
In case of Cabinet Secretary such permission may be given by the Prime Minister.
II

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Immunity Enjoyed by Legislators
The National Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution recommended
(Para 5.15.6) that Article 105 (2) may be amended to clarify that the imm uni ty enjoyed
by Members 'Of Parliament under parliamentary privileges should not cover corrupt acts
committed by them in connection with their duties in the House or otherwise. Such a
recommendation was made because corrupt acts include accepting money or other valuable
considerations to speak and/or vote in a particular manner and, for such acts, they should
be liable for action under the ordinary law of the land.
Right to equality and equal protection of law is a fundamental right and the Constitution
enshrines this principle of equality. The Ruling in P.Y. Narsimha Rao Vs. State creates an
anomalous situation wherein the Members of Parliament are immune from prosecution for
their corrupt acts if they are related to voting or speaking in the Parliament. It is, therefore,
necessary to amend the Constitution to remove this anamoly.
Summing up - Removing Article 311
The Commission believes that the rights of a civil servant under the Constitution should
be subordinate to the overall requirement of public interest and the contractual right of
the State. It cannot be an argument that a corrupt civil servant's rights are more important
than the need to ensure an honest, efficient and corruption-free administration.
Articles 309, 310 and 311 form a continuum. If the whole gamut of "conditions of service"
is codified as required by the substantive part of Article 309, this can include matters
such as disciplinary proceedings and imposition of penalties. Moreover, as noted above,
with rule of law accepted as an integral part of the basic structure of the constitution,
reasonable protection now attributed to Article 311 will continue to be available to satisfy
the requirements of 'rule of law'.
Taking into account these considerations and a fairly common perception that explicit
articulation of "protection" in the Constitution itself gives an impression of inordinate
'protection', the Commission is of the view that on balance Article 311 need not continue
to be a part of the Constitution. Instead appropriate and comprehensive legislation under
Article 309 could be framed to cover all aspects of recruitment and service, even with regard
to dismissal, removal or reduction in rank.

Ethics in Governance
Disciplinary Proceedings
At present, the proceedings are dilatory and time consuming. The Commission is of the view
that the existing regulations governing disciplinary proceedings need to be simplified and
the following broad principles should be followed in laying down the new regulations.
a. The procedure needs to be made simple so that the proceedings could be
completed within a short time frame.
b. Emphasis should be on documentary evidence, and only in case documentary
evidence is not sufficient, recourse should be made to oral evidence.
c. An appellate mechanism should be provided within the department itself.
d. Imposition of major penalties should be recommended by a committee in order
to ensure objectivity.
INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK
The Lok Pal
The first Administrative Reforms Commission had recommended the establishment of the
institution ofLok Pal. The Lok Pal Bill has been introduced several times but due to various
reasons it has not been enacted into law.
The Commission is of the view that the Lok Pal Bill (redesignated as Rashtriya Lokayukta
Bill) should become law with the least possible delay. As recommended in the Bill, the Lokpal
should deal with allegations of corruption against Ministers and Members of Parliament.
Allegations of corruption against government officials are dealt with departmentally and
also by the Central Bureau of Investigation under the Central Vigilance Commission. In
some cases of corruption there may be collusion between the Ministers and the officers.
Therefore there should be an organic link between the Lok Pal and the Central Vigilance
Commissioner.
The Commission is of the view that the Lok Pal should be a three-member body. This would
bring in the expertise and insight of more than one person which would be essential for
transparency and objectivity.
II

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
In constitutional theory, according to the Westminster model, the Prime Minister is the
first among equals in a Council of Ministers exercising collective responsibility. Therefore,
whatever rules apply to other Ministers, should apply to the Prime Minister as well.
However, there are deeper issues The Prime Minister's unchallenged authority and leadership
are critical to ensure cohesion and sense of purpose in government, and to make our
Constitutional scheme function in letter and spirit. The Prime Minister is accountable to
the Parliament, and if the Prime Minister's conduct is open to formal scrutiny by extra
Parliamentary authorities, then the government's viability is eroded and Parliament's
supremacy is in jeopardy.
Any enquiry into a Prime Minister's official conduct by any authority other than the
Parliament would severely undermine the Prime Minister's capacity to lead the government.
Such weakening of Prime Minister's authority would surely lead to serious failure of
governance.
A Prime Minister facing formal enquiry by a Lok Pal would cripple the government. One
can argue that such an enquiry gives the opportunity to the incumbent to defend himself
against baseless charges and clear his name. But the fact is, once there is a formal enquiry
by a Lok Pal on charges, however baseless they might be, the Prime Minister's authority
is severely eroded, and the government will be paralysed. Subsequent exoneration of the
Prime Minister cannot undo the damage done to the country or to the office of the Prime
Minister. If the Prime Minister is indeed guilty of serious indiscretions, Parliament should
be the judge of the matter, and the Lok Sabha should remove the Prime Minister from
office.
It could be argued that since any Minister could be removed on Prime Minister's advice, or
Parliament as well, the Lok Pal need not have jurisdiction on a Minister's conduct also. But
Parliament does not really sit in judgment over a Minister's conduct. It is the Prime Minister
and the Council of Ministers as a whole whose fate is determined by Parliament's will. And
the Prime Minister does not have the time or energy to personally investigate the conduct
of a Minister. The government's investigative agencies are controlled or influenced by the
Ministers, and therefore it is difficult for the Prime Minister to get objective assessment
of the Ministers' official conduct. Therefore, an independent, impartial body of high
standing would be of great value in enforcing high standards of ethical conduct among
Ministers. A similar reasoning applies to Members of Parliament, since Parliament's time
and energy cannot be consumed by detailed enquiry into the conduct of a Member. But, , ~
the final decision of removing the Member must vest in Parliament, and that of removal
of a Minister must be on the advice of the Prime Minister. Parliament is responsible to

Ethics in Governance
the nation for its decisions, and the Prime Minister is responsible to the Parliament for his
decisions. These responsibilities of Parliament and Prime Minister cannot be transferred
to any unelected body.
The same principles and arguments also hold good in respect of the Chief Minister of a state.
But, if the Chief Minister is brought under the jurisdiction of a federal institution of high
standing, then the risks are mitigated. The Commission is of the view that once the Lok
Pal or equivalent institution is in place, all Chief Ministers should be brought under Lok
Pal's purview. Such a provision would necessitate making Lok Pal (Rashtriya Lokayukta) a
Constitutional authority and defining his jurisdiction in the Constitution while leaving the
details of appointment and composition to be fixed by parliament through legislation.
The Lokayukta
The Commission is of the view that to insulate the institution ofLokayukta from the vagaries
of political expediency, of the kind witnessed in the past, it would be necessary to give the
Lokayukta, as in the case of the Lok Pal, a Constitutional status. It would be necessary
to amend the Constitution to provide for the institution of Lokayukta in all states. This
would also provide the opportunity to vest this authority with certain uniform powers,
responsibilities and functions across all states. To this effect the Commission believes that
the Lokayukta can be a state level equivalent of the Rashtriya Lokayukta with a similar
constitution.
Ombudsman at the Local Level
The Commission is of the view that the Ombudsman should be appointed under the
respective Panchayat Raj/Urban Local Bodies Acts in all States/UTs., for a group of connected
districts. The Ombudsman should be empowered to investigate cases of corruption or
maladministration by functionaries of local self government institutions. It is often argued
that constitution of Local Ombudsman would lead to duplication of efforts since the
Lokayukta is already there. The Commission has already recommended that the Lokayukta
should investigate cases only against Ministers or equivalent rank public functionaries and
legislators. Therefore, there would be no clash of jurisdiction between the Local Ombudsman
and the Lokayukta. However, in order to provide proper guidance to the Local Ombudsman,
they should be placed under the overall guidance and superintendence of the Lokayukta.
Strengthening Investigation and Prosecution
Prosecution is often a weak link in the chain of anti-corruption law enforcement and there
are instances where prosecutors have facilitated the discharge of a delinquent officer. It would

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
be desirable that the Lokayuktas/State Vigilance Commissions are empowered to supervise
the prosecution of corruption related cases. This would provide the much needed oversight
of the prosecutors on the one hand, and guidance to the prosecutors on the other.
Corruption prevention and enforcement in an increasingly electronic environment
both in government institutions and outside, requires specific measures to equip the
investigating agencies with electronic investigating tools and capability to undertake such
investigation.
In view of the complexities involved in investigating modern-day corruption, the
investigating agencies should be equipped with economic, accounting and audit, legal,
technical, and scientific knowledge, skills and tools of investigation. It would be advisable
to have officials in the investigative agencies drawn from different wings of government.
Streamlined vertical corruption runs through several levels of the official hierarchy in
corruption prone departments, and does not receive the attention it deserves. This calls
for strengthening sources of information to specifically target officers involved in the chain
of hierarchical corruption. Anti-corruption agencies should conduct systematic surveys of
departments with particular reference to highly corruption prone ones in order to gather
intelligence and to observe officers at the higher levels with questionable reputations.
SOC~INFRASTRUCTURE
Citizens' Initiatives
The Commission feels that in order to make these charters effective tools for holding
public servants accountable, the charters should clearly spell out the remedy/penalty/
compensation in case there is a default in meeting the standards spelt out in the charter. It
would be better to have a few promises which can be kept rather than a long list of lofty
declarations which are impractical.
Citizens may be involved in the assessment and maintenance of ethics in major government
offices and institutions with large public contacts. A mechanism needs to be put in place in
government offices so that a data base of all visitors is maintained. The professional agency
should contact these persons and get their feedback.
School awareness programmes can be very effective in bringing about attitudinal changes
in the society. Such programmes are ideally taken up in high schools and should educate
students about the role of citizens in a democracy, the role of civil society, harmful effects
of corruption etc.

Ethics in Governance
There are reward schemes in taxation departments where complainants are rewarded a
percentage of the income unearthed based on the information. Such cases of rewards should
also be offered where information is furnished about corrupt practices.
False Claims Act
The existing provisions in the Indian Penal Code and other enactments are not adequate
to enable interested citizens and civil society groups to approach courts for recovery of
the proceeds of corruption and provide for a share in the proceeds. In the United States,
the False Claims Act makes it possible for interested citizens to approach any court in any
judicial district for recovery of the proceeds of corruption.
There is need for legislation on the lines of the US False Claims Act, which will make it
possible for interested citizens and civil society groups to seek legal relief for the recovery
of the proceeds of corruption and claim a share. Such a law would help in curbing
corruption where the fraud has been committed in collusion with a public servant. But
more important, such a law would help in building a culture of fair play in private and
public organizations.
Role ofM edia
A free media has a crucial role in the prevention, monitoring and control of corruption.
Investigative reporting by media or reporting of instances of corruption as they occur can
be a significant source of information on corruption. Very often there is no systematic
arrangement to take note of these allegations and to follow them up. The collation of reports
appearing in different sections of the media and their follow up should be an integral part
of complaints monitoring mechanism in all public offices.
Sometimes, under pressure of competition, the media does not verify allegations and
information before putting them in the public domain. Occasionally, such allegations/
complaints are motivated. It is necessary to evolve norms and practices that all allegations/
complaints would be duly screened, and the person against whom such allegations are made
is given a fair chance to put forth his version.
Social Audit
The Commission, without entering into details of all these, would like to suggest that
provisions for social audit should be made a part of the operational guidelines of all
schemes.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
SYSTEMIC REFORMS
Promoting Competition
Most public services in India are provided by government in a monopolistic setting.
Introduction of an element of competition in the provision of public services is thus a very
useful tool to curb corruption.
Clearly, ending government's monopoly in a large number of service sectors and allowing
others to compete can playa major role in reducing corruption. However, deregulating
in one area may increase corruption elsewhere. The process can itself be subverted and
sometimes private agencies, which replace the government agencies in service delivery
could be even more corrupt. It is, therefore, necessary that such demonopolisation and
competition is accompanied by a 'regulation mechanism' to ensure performance as per
prescribed standards so that public interest is protected.
Simplifying Transactions
The causal relationship between incidence and intensity of corruption and the complex
nature of work methods needs no elaboration. Similarly, elaborate hierarchies not only
breed complex work methods but also cause diffusion of responsibility.
A single window clearance of all requirements or one-stop service centres is a step which
can cut down on corruption as it simplifies procedures and reduces layers. This requires not
merely a single window but also fully automated back up of all related offices. Yet another
administrative method is what is called 'positive silence' sanctions, an example of which is
deemed sanction of an application upon expiry of the stipulated period for such sanction
as in the case of deemed sanction of building permits.
Most of the procedures dealing with permissions, licenses and registration were laid down
years ago. These procedures are quite complex and require documentation, which a common
citizen finds difficult to complete and 'touts' came into play. . It is, therefore, necessary
to have a review of all such procedures so that unnecessary procedural requirements are
eliminated.
Using Information Technology
Before any introduction of IT is attempted, it is necessary that the existing procedures are
properly re-engineered and made computer adaptable.

Ethics in Governance
There have been several successes in introduction of e-governance. But the greatest challenge
has been their replicability and up-scaling. There are very few examples of egovernance
examples with a nationwide impact (the railway reservation system is one of them). The
lack of good infrastructure and the inadequate capability of the personnel have proved to be
major bottlenecks in the spread of e-governance. Much greater attention needs to be paid
to familiarize Departmental officials with the relevant processes and their capabilities.
The National Informatics Centre (NIC) has played a useful role in facilitating e-Governance.
The Commission feels that NIC may take concrete steps to build up skills and domain
expertise among its personnel so that specific organizational needs are more fully understood
by technology providers. The Ministry of Information Technology itself must assess new
areas for computerization across the country.
Integrity Pacts
One mechanism that can help in promoting transparency and creating confidence in public
contracting is the use of 'integrity pacts'. The term refers to an agreement between the public
agency involved in procuring goods and services and the bidder for a public contract to the
effect that the bidders have not paid and shall not pay any illegal gratification to secure the
contract in question. An important feature of such pacts is that they often involve oversight
and scrutiny by independent, outside observers.
The Commission understands that Government organizations in the country have so far
not shown much interest in adopting this healthy practice. The reluctance is said to be
also on account of uncertainty about the place of such pacts in our legal framework. The
Commission feels that this mechanism must be encouraged and integrated into government
transactions in as many sectors as possible.
Reducing Discretion
Opportunities for corruption are greater in a system with excessive discretion in the hands
of the official machinery particularly at lower levels.
There are a large number of governmental activities where discretion can be totally
eliminated. All such activities could be automated and supported by IT. Where it is not
possible to eliminate discretion, then the exercise of powers should be bound by well
defined guidelines to minimize discretion. Effective checks and balances should be built
over exercise of discretion.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Supervision
There have to be effective checks and balances against the discretion vested in public
functionaries. Supervision provides one such mechanism.
Each level should be responsible for taking preventive steps to minimize the scope of
corruption for the levels below it. It is, therefore, suggested that reporting officers while
evaluating the performance of their subordinates should clearly comment on the efforts
made by the latter to check corruption.
It should be mandated that in case a reporting officer has given a 'clean chit' in his assessment
of any officer and such an officer is charged with any offence under the Prevention of
Corruption Act and the corrupt act took place wholly or partly during the year under
report, then the reporting officer should explain why that officer was given the 'integrity
certificate' .
Ensuring Accessibility and Responsiveness
Concentration of tasks which are corruption prone in a few hands should be avoided.
These tasks should be, as far as possible, broken up into activities which are handled
by different people. Public interaction should be limited to the head of office and some
designated officers. This can be supported by a 'single window front office' for providing
information.
Monitoring Complaints
Most public offices in India have a complaint monitoring system, but more often than
not, the system does not work, as the complaint ends with the official against whom the
charges are alleged. While setting up deadlines in a country of our size and complexity may
be difficult, some attempts in the direction are necessary. Complaints must be monitored,
followed up and an end result achieved within a specified period to be given in general or
by the supervising officer for a particular case.
Risk Management for Preventive Vigilance
Risk profiling of government officials poses a challenge in the sense that the presentm system
of performance evaluation discourages a reporting officer from giving anything 'adverse'.
Moreover, categorizing an official as 'high' risk based on an adverse rating by one reporting
officer may not be fair (unless a glaring misconduct has come to notice). It would, therefore,
be better if risk profiling of officers is done by a committee of 'eminent persons' after the

Ethics in Governance
officer has completed ten years of service, and then once in every five years. The committee
should use the following inputs in coming to a conclusion:
a. The performance evaluation of the reported officer.
b. A self-assessment given by the reported officer focusing on the efforts he/she has
made to prevent corruption in his/her career.
c. Reports from the vigilance organization.
d. A peer evaluation to be conducted confidentially by the committee through an
evaluation form.
Integrity tests, like all tests, are imperfect, and can lead to wrong conclusions and are thus
not a foolproof method to evaluate integrity of a person. Therefore, taking displinary action
based on such a test would not stand the scrutiny by a court, but these can be used as one
of the inputs while risk profiling an officer.
Audit
It would be desirable to make a standing arrangement with CAG and the AG to report
instances of serious irregularities as soon as they are unearthed in audit. A second innovation
in this regard would be to equip the agency concerned in the mechanics of forensic audit so
that aspects crucial for criminal investigation could be taken due care of. It would be in the
fitness of things if the anti-corruption bodies are equipped to undertake such forensic audit
of government departments where major irregularities come to their notice. To start with,
a forensic audit training course could be conducted to develop expertise in this regard.
Proactive Vigilance on Corruption
The Commission feels that proactive measures should also be initiated by the departments/
organizations themselves, as the inputs available with them about their officials and the
tasks they perform are much more than with an external machinery.
Intelligence Gathering
Gathering intelligence about their own personnel is a practice followed by security and
investigative agencies. Although all such measures may not always be desirable or practical,
a supervisory officer should assess the integrity of his/her subordinates based on his/her
handling of cases, complaints and feedback from different sources.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Vigilance Network
There are a large number of disciplinary cases and also criminal cases relating to corruption
pending with various authorities. It would be desirable to create a national database of such
cases, which should be in the public domain. The Central Vigilance Commission may take
the lead in establishing such a networked database.
PROTECTING THE HONEST CIVIL SERVANT
The raison d' etre of vigilance activity is not to reduce but to enhance the level of managerial
efficiency and effectiveness in the organization. Risk-taking should form part of government
functioning. Every loss caused to the organization, either in pecuniary or non-pecuniary
terms, need not necessarily become the subject matter of a vigilance inquiry.
The Central Vigilance Commission has recogniZed this possibility of genuine commercial
decisions going wrong without any motive whatsoever being attached to such decisions.
There are genuine apprehensions about the system's ability to protect an honest public
servant. Fortunately, there are sufficient safeguards in the law and procedure to ensure
protection of an honest civil servant against baseless, mala-fide, malicious and motivated
complaints.
The Central Vigilance Commission has instituted a mechanism for screening cases of public
sector executives within its jurisdiction. The question is one of exercising due discrimination
to protect an honest civil servant from being dragged through investigative processes
involving harassment and loss of prestige and enormous anguish.
There is a general perception among officers and managers that anti-corruption agencies
do not fully appreciate administrative and business risks and that they tend to misinterpret
the motives where the decision has gone awry or where a loss is caused in a commercial
transaction. Such a perception is not without foundation. It is essential therefore for the
investigating agencies to establish that their actions are designed in such a way as to protect
honest officers.
The crucial question is one of ensuring a balance between equality before law and
protection of an honest civil servant who has his reputation to safeguard, unlike a corrupt
one. Such a balance could be achieved by an impartial agency which would screen cases
of prior permission for investigation and sanction prosecution of public servants involved
in corruption. The Commission has already .recommended that the Central Vigilance
Commission should be empowered to give such permission.

Ethics in Governance
There is need for a special investigation unit reporting to the proposed Lok Pal (Rashtriya
Lokayukta) to investigate allegations of corruption against investigating agencies. This unit
should be multi-disciplinary and should also investigate cases of allegations of harassment
against the investigating agency. Similar units should also exist in States under the State
Lokayuktas.

PUBLIC ORDER
- Justice for each . .. Peace for all
Public Order -A General Perspective
(Internal security is the foundation for peace and development oft he nation"
Causative Factors ofM ajor Public Order Problems
Any serious analysis of public order should recognise the inextricable link between crime
control and public order. Deterioration in the 'crime situation' adversely affects public order
and vice versa. Unchecked, widespread crime creates a culture of lawlessness. A society,
which does not deal with crime swiftly and effectively, in effect rewards criminals and
makes life insecure for innocent law abiding citizens. If such a climate persists, more and
more people tend to perceive that crime pays, and that there is no penalty or risk attached
to it. In addition, unpunished criminals become the agents of disorder in society. Local
criminal gangs are almost always involved deeply in engineering or perpetuating violence
in times of breakdown of public order. For instance, in almost all communal riots, the
rowdy history sheeters and local criminals are involved in causing violence and mayhem.
Any attempt to upgrade the existing arrangements to deal with public order aberrations
will be unsuccessful unless accompanied by measures to generally bolster the system of
administering criminal justice.
Following, a well-known authority on the Indian police, three broad categories of public
violence can be discerned: violence of remonstrance, violence of confrontation, and violence
of frustration. There are five broad causes of the types of violence mentioned above. These
can be categorised as follows:
i. Social: In India, the historical social structures and 'hierarchy' has been a root
cause for social unrest. Caste has been a fundamental divisive factor in our
society.
ii. Communal' Religious orthodoxy and blind adherence to extreme view points is
another fundamental cause for unrest. In India; the existence of every religion
side by side has been a matter of strength in our multi-cultural system but
fringe elements often create unrest.

Public Order - Justice for each ... Peace for all
iii. Economic: Under-development is arguably a cause of tension. The desire
to improve one's position in competition with others, itself creates stress
and in India, with 250 million people below the poverty line, the strain is
significan t.
iv. Administrative: The administrative machinery is not always perceived by people
to be objective and fair. Slackness in delivery of services, lethargy in enforcement
of laws is at times a major reason for frustration in citizens. Corrupt and self
seeking behaviour of some officials further compounds the problem. One of
the major causative factors for the eruption of public disorder is the inadequacy
of the administration in enforcing the legitimate constitutional, statutory and
traditional rights of citizens leading to serious discontentment among them.
v. Political: In a vibrant democratic system, not a totalitarian regime, divergent
political view points can lead to tension. More important, however, is the
problem of political expediency where a section of the political leadership tries
to use the administration for furthering its own political agenda. The increasing
propensity to use public office for private gain, unwarranted interference in
crime investigation and day to day functioning of police, short-term populism
at the cost of durable solutions, complexities of a federal polity - all these make
it difficult to address some of the growing threats to public order. Added to
this is the relatively low importance attached to public order in our political
discourse. All these contribute to breakdown of the public order fabric.
The Need for Comprehensive Reforms
Attaining a situation where there is perfect public order is no doubt utopian. Perhaps a more
realistic target would be to establish the rule of law. It has been said that a State establishes
rule of law by making it easier for people to do right and making it difficult for them to do
wrong. This is achieved through a combination of preventive and deterrent measures.
Several stakeholders have to work in harmony to establish the rule of law. Essentially such
a rule of law would entail:
• a legal framework, which is fair and just and provides equal opportunities for
all;
• an effective, fair and just civil administration which infuses respect for law;

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
• an effective, efficient, accountable and well equipped police system which prevents
any threat to rule of law;
• a strong, autonomous and effective crime investigation machinery backed by
a professionally competent prosecution and a fair and swift criminal justice
system;
• a civil society which is vigilant about its rights and duties; and
• an alert and responsible media.
The Existing Police System
Problems in the Existing Police Functioning
The major problems in the functioning of the Indian police have been brought to the fore
recently through high profile cases, wherein callousness, collusion, shoddy investigation
and 'hostile witnesses' made a mockery of the entire criminal justice system.
The deeper malaise that afflicts Indian policing has its focus on maintaining law and order
rather than trying to understand and resolve underlying problems. It is argued that the
traditional snobbery and system of patronage has continued, corruption levels have gone
up and so also the extent of political interference. There is a propensity to resort to physical .
violence and coercion even during investigations rather than taking recourse to scientific
and sophisticated methods to gather evidence. The emphasis, therefore, is on oral evidence
or confession, rather than on forensic evidence.
It is therefore not surprising that the police are often perceived, not as citizen friendly
guardians of public security and upholders of the rule of law, but as being biased against
the oppressed and dishonest. Perhaps nowhere is the asymmetry of power in a society so
evident as in the behaviour and attitude of the police particularly towards the disadvantaged
sections of society.
It would not, however, be fair to place the entire blame on the police for the failure of the
criminal justice system, because there are many factors responsible for the present situation.
These could be broadly classified as follows:
1. Problems related to general administration
• Poor enforcement of laws and general failure of administration;
• Large gap between aspirations of the people and opportunities with resultant

Public Order - Justice for each ... Peace for all
deprivation and alienation; and
• Lack of coordination between various government agencies.
ii. Problems related to police
• Problems of organisation, infrastructure and environment;
o Unwarranted political interference;
o Lack of empowerment of the cutting edge functionaries;
o Lack of motivation at the lower levels due to poor career prospects, and
hierarchical shackles;
o Lack of modern technology/methods of investigation;
o Obsolete intelligence gathering techniques and infrastructures; and
o Divorce of authority from accountability.
• Problems of organisational behaviour;
o Inadequate training; and
o Entrenched attitudes of arrogance, insensitivity and patronage.
• Problems of stress due to overburdening;
o Multiplication of functions, with crime prevention and investigation
taking a back seat;
o Shortage of personnel and long working hours; and
o Too large a population to handle.
• Problems related to ethical functioning;
o Corruption, collusion and extortion at different levels;
o Insensitivity to human rights; and
o Absence of transparent recruitment and personnel policies.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
iii. Problems related to prosecution
• Best talent not attracted as public prosecutors;
• Lack of coordination between the investigation and the prosecution
agencies; and
• Mistrust of police in admitting evidence.
iv. Problems related to the judicial process/criminal justice administration
• Large pendency of cases;
• Low conviction rates;
• No emphasis on ascertaining truth; and
• Absence of victims' perspective and rights.
Core Principles ofP olice Reforms
On the basis of the analysis and recommendations of various expert bodies and inputs
from citizens, civil society groups and professionals, the Commission is of the view that
the following eight core principles should form the bedrock of police and criminal justice
reforms:
Responsibility oft he Elected Government
In a democracy, people transfer a part of the right over their lives to government in order to
serve the common goal of ensuring public order and protecting the liberties of all citizens.
In our system, government is accountable to the legislature and to the people. Any reform
proposal must recognise this requirement of democratic accountability and the responsibility
of the political executive and elected legislatures. A police free from political direction
can easily degenerate into an unaccountable force with the potential to undermine the
foundations of democracy as does petty, partisan and casteist political interference in the
functioning of police. The coercive power of the police can easily extinguish liberty unless
it is tempered by responsible political direction. A corollary or welcome consequence of
responsible political direction will be the much needed depoliticisation of the police.
Authority, Autonomy and Accountability
At the same time, the various wings of police should have the authority and resources

Public Order - Justice for each ... Peace for all
to fulfill their responsibilities. Each such wing should have functional and professional
autonomy commensurate with its requirements. However, such autonomy and authority
should be accompanied by clearly defined formal systems of accountability.
Disaggregation and Deconcentration
A single, monolithic force now discharges several functions: maintaining law and order,
riot control, crime investigation, protection of State assets, V1P protection, traffic control,
ceremonial and guard duties, service of summons and production of witnesses in courts,
anti-terrorist and anti-extremist operations, intelligence gathering, bandobast during
elections, crowd control and several other miscellaneous duties. Often, even fire protection
and rescue and relief are treated as police functions. In addition, giving support to state
functionaries in removal of encroachments, demolition of unauthorised structures and such
other regulatory activities are also treated as police responsibilities. Aggregation of all these
functions in a single police force is clearly dysfunctional for four reasons: First, the core
functions are often neglected when the same agency is entrusted with several functions.
Second, accountability is greatly diluted when duties cannot be clearly and unambiguously
stated and performance cannot be measured and monitored. Third, the skills and resources
required for each function are unique and a combination of often unrelated functions
undermines both morale and professional competence. Fourth, each function requires a
different system of control and level of accountability. When a single agency is entrusted
with all functions, the natural propensity is to control all functions by virtue of the need
to control one function.
Independence of Crime Investigation
However, in real life this core function of crime prevention and investigation, often, is
relegated to the background. Excessive reliance on 'brawn' in other areas has blunted the
professional skills required for effective investigation.
The Commission is of the view that a separate, elite crime investigation agency of police
should be created in each state and it must be completely insulated from undue political
and partisan influences.
Self-esteem ofP olicemen
Nearly 87% of all police personnel are constables. A constable devoid of dignity, lacking
opportunities for vertical mobility, constantly pilloried by superiors and politicians, often
derided by the public and habituated to easy recourse to violence and force cannot generally be
expected to sustain his/her self-esteem or acquire the professional skills to serve the citizens.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Apart from the constabulary, the police force is top heavy. There is over-crowding at the top
based generally on geographic or functional jurisdiction with no real strength at middle
management levels.
The Commission is of the view that police recruitment needs to be restructured significantly
in order to enhance motivation and morale, professionalism and competence of the
personnel.
Professionalisation, Expertise and Infrastructure
Effective crime investigation, competent law and order management and useful intelligence
gathering demand high standards of professionalism and adequate infrastructural and
training support. Specialised training facilities are vital to hone skills and constantly upgrade
them. Like national defence, internal security and public order cannot be compromised
under any circumstances, if the integrity of the State and constitutional values are to be
protected.
Attendant Criminal Law Reform
Police reforms by themselves, though necessary, are not sufficient. It is therefore necessary
that other parts of the criminal justice system are also made effective and efficient.
The number of courts is India is inadequate to meet the requirement of justice. Therefore,
enhancing the strength of judges and creation of local courts to settle disputes and punish
crimes swiftly are vital.
In addition, there is need to amend procedural aspects of law in keeping with the times.
Once the police act independently but with accountability, there would be need to amend
the provisions of law to restore this trust, such as by making statements recorded by the
police, admissible. Given the propensity of witnesses to perjure themselves in our courts,
we need to strengthen the law against perjury. The challenge posed by terrorists and armed
groups to national unity and integrity must be countered by appropriate legal provisions.
The role of the Union government in respect of inter-state crimes, organised crime, terrorism
etc also needs to be redefined to be able to protect national interests.
Police to be a Service: Community-oriented rather than ruler-oriented as ordained under
the 1861 Police Act.
The concept of police as a 'Service' instead of a 'Force' encompasses the ideas of effective
accountability, citizen centricity and respect for human rights and the dignity of the
individual, These values should permeate all aspects of policing.

Public Order - Justice for each ... Peace for all
Police Reforms
Organisational Structure oft he Police oft he Future
A bird's eye view of the holistic restructuring of the police as envisioned by the Commission
will bring clarity and facilitate better understanding.
Investigation of crimes (except offences entailing a prescribed punishment of, say, three years
prison term or less) would be entrusted to a separate, fully autonomous, elite, professional,
investigation agency in each state. This agency and the prosecution wing, would be managed
by an independent Board headed by a retired High Court Judge.
An independent prosecution wing, staffed by serving trial judges on deputation, special
prosecutors appointed from time to time, and public prosecutors appointed for a renewable
five year term would function under the supervision of the same Board, and work in close
coordination with the crime investigation agency.
All crimes (entailing prescribed punishment of less than three years imprisonment) would
be investigated by the law and order police, and more serious offences will be transferred to
the independent Crime Investigation Agency. A system oflocal courts would ensure speedy
justice through fair, but summary procedures (covering cases entailing prescribed punishment
of up to one year). These local courts would be an integral part of the independent judiciary
and would function under the full control of the High Court and Subordinate Courts. Many
functions which need not be discharged by the police directly - service of summons, escort
and general duties, etc. - would be outsourced or transferred to appropriate agencies. Duties
under special laws would be transferred progressively to the concerned departments.
Local police (under local authorities), in addition to investigation of petty crimes, would
attend to other local police functions including traffic management and minor local law
and order maintenance. More police functions would be progressively brought under the
supervision of local governments.
There would be a strong forensic division, with well-equipped laboratories in each district,
to support the Crime Investigation Agency (and other police agencies). The Forensic
division would be under the control of a Board of Investigation which is discussed later in
this Report.
The rest of the police (excluding crime investigation and local police) would constitute the
law and order agency.
With the functional restructuring of police as proposed about, and the creation of three
distinct agencies, there would be need for a coordinating mechanism among these agencies

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
to ensure harmonious functioning. Within each agency, the day to day operational control
would vest with the chief of the agency, and an Establishment Board would advise on
transfers, postings and service matters and would deal with internal complaints.
All the police wings, except the armed police battalions, would be staffed by officers. The
Crime Investigation Agency would be an officer corps since inception, and in other wings
there would be a progressive shift by attrition of constables. There would be no future
recruitment of constables, except to the required extent in armed police battalions, including
at the cutting edge level where the constable would be replaced by an officer (Assistant Sub
Inspector of Police).
Police Accountability Mechanism - Balancing Autonomy and Control
State Government and the Police
The first and foremost issue required to be addressed in police reforms is the relation
between the State Government and the Police. Public Order and Police are state subjects.
The Police Act, 1861 gives the power of control and superintendence of the police to the
State Government.
Considering the fact that formal and informal instructions (sometimes blatantly illegal)
on every detail are issued, the Commission has considered this and is of the view that a
provision in the law should be made that issuing illegal or malafide instructions/ directions
by any government functionary to any police functionary and obstruction of justice would
be an offence.
The Commission is of the view that the issue of accountability of the police is very
sensitive. There is no doubt that the police have to be accountable, but to whom should
the police be accountable and to what extent? The police perform different functions and
the accountability required for each one of these is quite different. For example, for crime
investigation, the police should not be subjected to executive control, whereas the preventive
and service functions require civilian oversight.
The Commission has carefully examined this issue and feels that a clear separation of
investigation from law and order duties is required. The entire police would have to be
restructured so as to have two separate agencies -one dealing with 'Investigations' and the
other dealing with 'Law and Order'. The Commission is aware of the close linkages required
between crime investigation and maintenance of law and order. This could be achieved
through appropriate coordination mechanisms/linkages at various levels. But the agencies
have to be separate and personnel should be non-transferable.

Pub ic Order - Justice for each ... Peace for all
The investigation police should be placed under an independent Police Chief w 0 would
in turn be supervised by a Board of Investigation. This arrangement would comp etely
insulate the investigation police from unwarranted political and administrative interference
as the Board of Investigation would have full administrative control over the Investigation
Police. The Board of Investigation should also supervise the Forensic Department and the
Prosecution Department.
The Board of Investigation should have a retired High Court Judge as its hea ,an an
eminent lawyer, an eminent citizen, a retired police officer, a retired civil servant, the orne
Secretary (ex-officio), the Director General of Police (ex-officio), the Chief of Investigation
(ex-officio) and the Chief of Prosecution (ex-officio) as Members. The Chairman and non
official Members of the Board should be appointed by a high powered collegium, heade by
the Chief Minister and comprising the Speaker of the Assembly, Chief Justice of the High
Court, Home Minister and Leader of the Opposition in the Legislative Assembly.
The Chief of Investigation should be appointed by the State Government from a panel of
officers recommended by the Board of Investigation. The Chief of Investigation should be
appointed for a minimum tenure of three years, and he shall not be removed before the
expiry of this tenure except with the approval of the Board of Investigation.
A large majority of crimes are minor offences which could be easily handled by the' awand
order' police at the police station level (and the local police) with its established supervisory
hierarchy. However, because of the existing spread of police stations, registration of crimes
should continue to be with the regular police station. On receipt of any information the
initial work of investigation could be commenced by the law and order police till the matter
is taken over by the Crime Investigation Agency, so that valuable ti e and evidence is not
lost.
The Crime Investigation Agency may have about 5000-10000 trained officers in the larger
states of the country, and will have to be backed by strong forensic and ot er infrastructure.
This would also help curb the tendency to have increasing number of cases from allover
the country being transferred to'an over-burdened Central Bureau of Investigation.
This arrangement can be institutionalised in cities with a population of more than one
million immediately and within a period of three years all urban areas could be covered.
Within five years, all rural and urban areas coutd be covered under this new arrangement,
ensuring complete separation and autonomy of crime investigation.

Reports of the Administrive Reform~ Commission - A Summary
Accountability ofL aw and Order Machinery
The Commission is of the view that a mechanism similar to the State Board of Investigation
is required for providing supervision and guidance to the other wings of police. It would be
more appropriate to name the body as "Police Performance and Accountability Commission"
(PPAC).
The Commission feels that the State Police Performance and Accountability Commission
(PPAC) should prepare a panel only for the State's of Director General of Police and not
for the other Directors General of Police. The Commission feels that the State's Director
General of Police should have a minimum tenure of three years.
The Commission feels that while it is necessary to ensure a stable tenure to the Director
General of Police, if the incumbent is found to be not competent, acts illegally or commits
misconduct, the State Government should be able to remove him/her without any difficulty
on an appropriate recommendation of PPAC. To achieve a balance between the State's
power to remove an incompetent or a delinquent officer and ensuring a stable tenure for
the Director General of Police it could be prescribed that the State Government shall have
the powers to remove the Director General of Police but shall not do so unless the State
Police Performance and Accountability Commission agrees to it.
Police Establishment Committees
A closely related aspect of efficient functioning and autonomy of the police is the posting
of officers based on merit and professional experience. Posting of police officers on
considerations other than merit is a major reason which hampers efficient functioning of
the police.
The Commission would recommend that there should be a Police Establishment Committee
with a broad base in respect of appointments to the top management. Therefore, the Police
Establishment Committee in matters relating to officers of the rank of Inspector General
of Police and above should have the Chief Secretary as Chairperson, the Chief of Law and
Order Police as Member Secretary and the Home Secretary and a nominee of the State
Police Performance and Accountability Commission as Members.
Similarly, the Police Establishment Committee for matters dealing with officers of the ranks
ofDy. SP/ASP (or gazetted officers) and above, up to the rank of Inspector General of Police,
should have the State's Director General of Police as its Chairman and two other police·
officers to be nominated by the State Police Performance and Accountability Commission
as members. Besides, the State Police Performance and Accountability Commission

Public Order - Justice for each ... Peace for all
should also nominate one of its members on this Committee. Similarly there should be a
District Police Committee for each District headed by the Superintendent of Police and
have the Additional Superintendent(s) of Police, and an Assistant Superintendent/Deputy
Superintendent of Police as members to deal with matters related to transfers, postings and
disciplinary matters relating to non-gazetted officers and all staff.
Competent Prosecution and Guidance to Investigation
The Commission is of the considered view that a system should be evolved at the district
level which ensures professional competence, fair trial and close coordination between
investigation and prosecution. A system similar to the District Attorney must be evolved
in the country. The Commission feels that given our conditions, elected District Attorneys
are neither desirable nor acceptable to society and the judiciary. We need highly competent,
credible, impartial prosecutors who carry conviction with the public, can effectively guide
investigation and control prosecution. Therefore, the Commission recommends that judicial
officers of the rank of District Judge may be appointed as District Attorneys who in turn
would guide investigation and control prosecution and also ensure proper coordination and
understanding between the two. All the prosecutors in the district would work under the
administrative and technical control of the District Attorney who would function under
the overall guidance of the Chief Prosecutor of the State.
There should be a Chief Prosecutor for each state to be appointed by the Board of
Investigation. The Chief Prosecutor should be a senior eminent criminal lawyer and should
be appointed for a period of three years. The Chief Prosecutor should guide and supervise
the District Attorneys. Subject to the above stipulations, the Government of India and the
State Governments should initiate urgent steps to implement the seven-point aspects of
police inform and restructuring as inundated by the Supreme Court in September, 2006
in the PIL Prakash Singh & Others Vs. Union of India and the State Governments.
Local Police and Traffic Management
As a large number of special laws are legislated by the states, it is suggested that an ·inter
disciplinary group may be constituted by the Home Department of each state to study all
laws and thereafter suggest transfer of investigation powers relating to application of local
and special laws to the concerned departments. Similarly, a group may also be set up at the
Union level to examine this issue in respect of Union Laws.
Local governments also enforce a large number of Rules and Regulations. These extend to
maintaining sanitation and hygiene, controlling public nuisance, removing encroachments
etc. The power to investigate such minor offences should be given to the local bodies.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
The Commission is of the view that there is need to constitute a similar local police service
in bigger cities with populations of more than one million and this should be extended to
other cities and rural areas in a phased manner. The local police should be empowered to
deal with offences prescribed under municipal and local Laws.
Although regulation of flow of traffic is done by the traffic police, there is a multiplicity of
agencies dealing with the broader issue of urban traffic management. In the fragmented
structure that exists at present an integrated approach to traffic management is not possible.
Therefore, it is recommended that all aspects of traffic management should be entrusted
to the urban local bodies. To begin with this could be done in metropolitan cities with
population exceeding one million and gradually extended to other urban and rural areas.
However as patrolling and traffic management on the National Highways is becoming
increasingly important, that should be entrusted to the Law and Order police. Within the
city limits, this function may be discharged by the urban local body.
The Metropolitan Police Authorities
With rapid urbanisation and with some cities having population of more than that of a
small state, it is unfortunate that there is no mechanism of accountability of the police to
the people of the city.
The Commission therefore feels that if our police has to become 'community-centric', a
beginning must be made by giving a voice to its citizens in matters of policing. This could
be done by having Metropolitan Police Authorities in all cities with population over one
million. This Authority should have nominees of the State Government, elected municipal
councilors, and eminent non-partisan persons to be appointed by the government.
This Authority should have powers to plan and oversee community policing, improving
police-citizen interface, suggesting ways to improve quality of policing, approve annual
police plans and to review the working of such plans. The Authority should not, however,
interfere in the 'operational functioning' of police. In order to safeguard this, it should be
stipulated that individual members will have no executive functions nor can they inspect
or call for records or interfere in matters of transfers or postings.
Reducing Burden on Police - Outsourcing Non Core Functions
The police perform a number of functions, which do not require the special capability
and knowledge of police functions. The Comlnission is of the view that some of these non
core functions of the police should be outsourced or redistributed to other government
departments or private agencies.

Public Order - Justice for each ... Peace for al
Empowering the (Cutting Edge' Functionaries
Reforms in the organisation of the police have to be the critical first step in bringing about
a lasting and substantive change in police practices and behaviour. The first step would be
to upgrade the skills and training to the cutting edge level of the police service. Further,
the removal of the orderly system would also help the constabulary focus on their prime
duty, policing. The orderly system should also be immediately abolished.
With increasing awareness among the citizens the emphasis in police is shifting from 'brawn
to brain'. Instead of recruiting constables who are generally matriculates it would be better
to recruit graduates at the starting point in the Civil Police and give them the nomenclature
of Assistant Sub-Inspectors (AS I) .
The recruitment to the Armed Police units/Battalions may continue as at present but the
procedure for recruitment should be so designed as to ensure that it is totally transparent
and free from any stigma of corruption, casteism, gender, communalism and similar other
biases.
It is important that the composition of the police force should reflect the composition of
the society they are required to serve. Police service should have fair representation from
all sections of society including women. Unless recruitment camps are organised in a
widely dispersed manner, certain sections of society may hesitate to come to the traditional
recruitment centres. A more proactive approach is therefore required to attract persons from
all sections of the society to join the police force.
Time bound measures for improving satisfaction levels among police personnel by provision
of adequate housing and other welfare measures are required to be taken up on an urgent
basis. Provision of adequate leave, at least for one month each year, on the pattern of the
armed forces would also help provide a safety valve for police personnel suffering from
physical and psychological exhaustion due to trying working conditions.
The police - population ratio needs to be improved so that policemen are not required to
work unacceptably long hours on a regular basis as this impacts their morale, efficiency
and effectiveness.
Independent Complaints Authorities
The operation of effective grievance redressal systems against public authorities is a pre
requisite of good governance since it promotes both accountability and transparency. As
the move now is towards greater autonomy of the police, this neces itates more effective
public grievance redressal mec anis s.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
A separate District Police Complaints Authority should therefore be constituted for
allegations against the police. The District Police Complaints Authority should not inquire
into complaints relating to corruption which come under the purview of Lok Ayukta but
should focus on other types of public grievances against the police such as non registering of
complaints, general highhandedness, etc. The District Police Complaints Authority should
have an eminent citizen as its Chairperson, with an eminent lawyer and a retired government
servant as its members. This Authority should have powers to enquire against misconduct
or abuse of power against the police officers up to the rank of Deputy Superintendent of
Police. It should exercise all the powers of a civil court. The Disciplinary Authorities should
by and large accept the recommendations of the District Police Complaints Authority.
A State Police Complaints Authority (SPCA) should be constituted to look into cases of
serious misconduct by the police. It should also look into complaints against officers of the
rank of Superintendent of Police and above. The State Police Complaints Authority should
have a retired High Court Judge as Chairman. Nominees of the State Government, the
State Human Rights Commission, State Lok Ayukta, the State Womens' Commission, and
an eminent human rights activist should be the members of the Complaints Authority. It
should have the authority to ask any agency to conduct an enquiry or do the inquiry itself.
It should also be empowered to enquire into or review a case which is before any District
Police Complaints Authority if it feels that it is necessary to do so in public interest. The
State Authority should also monitor the functioning of the District Police Complaints
Authorities.
In order to prevent frivolous and vexatious complaints, it may be provided that if upon
an enquiry it is found that the complaint was frivolous or vexatious, then the Complaints
Authority should have the power to impose a reasonable fine on the complainant.
An Independent Inspectorate ofP olice
At present, the departmental hierarchy is responsible for ensuring that the police functions
efficiently. However, the system of rigorous inspection of police stations and the functioning
of police officers by higher departmental officers, has, over the years, become a routine
ineffective exercise. The Commission feels that there are advantages in setting up of an
independent Inspectorate of Police in each state under the supervision of the State Police
Performance and Accountability Commission.
At present, though the criminal laws are uniform throughout the country, there are variations
in police functioning from state to state. There should be some common standards for

Public Order - Justice for each ... Peace for all
functions of police, especially the quality of services required to be provided by them. The
task of identifying these common standards could be entrusted to the Bureau of Police
Research and Development.
All cases of deaths in encounters, irrespective of whether a complaint has been made or
not, should be inquired into by the proposed Inspectorate as an ongoing exercise to ensure
police accountability.
Improvement ofF orensic Science Infrastructure - Professionalisation ofI nvestigation
A Core Group was constituted by the National Human Rights Commission to make a
comprehensive examination of all aspects of forensic science services in India and to make
appropriate recommendations.
With regard to the organisation of the forensic science institutions, the Core Group stated
that the structure within these organisations is very hierarchical, compartmentalised,
insensitive, bureaucratic and rigid and that the internal culture is influenced by the police
environment.
The Core Group also noted the legal lacunae in the use of forensic science services in
investigation and trial. It pointed out that the CrPC and the Indian Evidence Act do not
provide for mandatory collection, preservation, examination of forensic material, and for
its appropriate legal status in the criminal justice process.
The Commission has examined the report of the Core Group and agrees with it.
Strengthening Intelligence Gathering
The system of the beat police which worked well in the past has fallen into disuse and in
big cities patrolling is done mainly in vehicles. The beat police apart from giving a sense
of security to the citizens, was also an important source of information. The Commission
feels that this system needs to be restored and strengthened.
In recent years, substantial measures have been taken to strengthen intelligence gathering and
coordination mechanisms have been set up at various levels. The Commission would however
like .to emphasise that the police station and its functionaries should be the prime source
for gathering intelligence. Rapid advancements in technology should be fully exploited for
intelligence gathering. Also a mechanism for fixing accountability of intelligence officials
and other executive officials who utilise such intelligence, needs to be evolved.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Training oft he Police
Training has by and large been a neglected area so far as the large number of subordinate
functionaries are concerned.
Often the State Police Training Schools where a large majority of policemen undergo training
are ill equipped, starved of funds and staffed by unwilling instructors. Furthermore, training
methodologies are often outdated and focus is more on discipline and regimentation.
Training is important not only for building capacity but also for bringing attitudinal change.
The Commission would like to emphasise its importance in police functioning.
Gender Issues in Policing
Since the police is the primary agency of the criminal justice system which protects human
rights, it is essential to sensitise police personnel to gender issues. A well designed gender
training, which internalises responses, can playa major role in changing mindsets, biases
and entrenched attitudes.
Another aspect of gender disparity of the criminal justice system is the low representation
of women in all wings and especially the police. It is estimated that women constitute only
about 2% of the civil police. This situation needs to be redressed through affirmative actions.
The National Commission on Women has made various recommendations regarding the
changes to be made in different laws. They have also made suggestions about sensitizing the
entire criminal justice system. While the reform of the criminal justice system as suggested
in this Report would help in making investigation more professional and help the victims
including women to get justice, the Commission feels that police at all levels needs to be
sensitized on gender issues.
Crimes against Vulnerable Sections
Crimes against Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
Certain sections of society like the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and children are more
vulnerable to exploitation and are often easy victims of crime. In these cases, maintenance.
of the established order or the status quo which may be exploitative does not ensure justice
and therefore is not a guarantee of permanent peace and public tranquility. Protection and
enforcement of the rights of these sections would amount to a rule of law and justice in
the real sense of the term. In their case, therefore, the role of the administration and police
becomes all the more important.

Public Order - Justice for each ... Peace for all
At times, the assertion of civil rights by the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes is met
with hostile reprisal against them by other sections of society. Sometimes even enforcement
agencies are reluctant to enforce the civil rights of the weaker sections for fear of further
trouble. The police will have to be specially sensitised to the problems of the Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes. This could be achieved through appropriate training programmes.
In areas with a history of communal and linguistic violence, as well as violence against
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, these vulnerable groups often harbour a sense
of insecurity. Such apprehensions can be allayed to a large extent if the local police have
adequate representation from these communities.
Crimes against Children
A recent study commissioned by the Ministry of Women and Child Welfare, Government
of India, based on a survey of 13 States and 12,447 children, has come out with startling
data on oppression and cruelty towards its most vulnerable segment i.e. children.
Unlike other victims, children often do not even realise that they are being wronged, and
even if they do realize this, very few would complain about it to the authorities. Therefore,
the enforcement agencies should themselves detect such violations and book the guilty.
The normal approach of beginning an investigation only on receipt of an FIR would not
suffice for dealing with crimes against children.
National Security Commission
The Central Police Organisations include several armed forces of the Union, each constituted
under a separate statute as indicated below:
• Border Security Force
• Indo-Tibetan Border Police
• Central Industrial Security Force
• Central Reserve Police. Force
Having the Chief of one of these Forces to recommend a panel of names for selection of
the Chief of another Force may not be appropriate. For one, hel she will not be familiar
with the working of other Forces. More over, a Chief of one of these Forces may also be in
the zone of consideration for being appointed as Chief of another Force.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
It is clear that the answer to the question of appointment of the Chief of these Central
Police Forces of the Union does not lie in the creation of a National Security Commission.
More so because, for dealing with all aspects of national security, there already exists the
high powered National Security Council, headed by the Prime Minister. The Commission
is of the view that the existing institutional mechanism of the oversight of the central police
forces may continue to be discharged by the Ministry of Home Affairs of the Government
of India. The selection of the Chiefs of these Central Polices Forces is done finally at the
highest level of the Governmernt of India through the established procedure of the Cabinet
Committee on Appointments.
The Commission is of the view that though each State may have its own structure of police,
quite understandably in a country of sub-continental dimensions, with the basic criminal
laws being the same nationally, it is possible and highly necessary to have national level
coordination institutions for various types of major crimes. It is also necessary to draw
standard protocols for cooperation and coordinated functioning between the Union and
the States. These protocols should cover issues like information sharing, joint investigation,
joint operations, inter-state operations by a state police in another state, regional cooperation
mechanisms and the safeguards required.
Maintaining Public Order
Public Order Management
It may appear that riots, especially communal riots, break out spontaneously, but a
deeper analysis would reveal that generally there is an incubation period during which the
underlying cause develops and the discontent/distrust keeps on simmering. The spark is
provided by an incident, which may even be accidental, causing the situation to flare up.
a. Measures to be taken during normal times to address any situation so that it
does not develop as a cause for rioting.
b. Measures to be taken when an outbreak of riot is apprehended.
c. Measures to be taken once a riot has started.
d. Measures to be taken once the riot has been controlled.
Measures to be Taken during Peace Time
Preventing a riot is very important, since once it starts, it can cause irreparable damage to
life, property and harmonious social relations. For this, the first and foremost requirement

Public Order - Justice for each ... Peace for all
is that the administration must win the trust of all sections of society by being responsive,
transparent, vigilant and fair in their dealing with all sections of society.
It is necessary that specific riot control plans based on ground realities are in place to meet
any eventuality. It is important that these plans are explained to all functionaries including
<
the police, the executive magistracy and community leaders so that they are fully aware of the
roles required of them and their response is both quick and judicious in times of crisis.
Intelligence gathering should not slacken during this phase.
It is the vigil and alertness maintained during normal peace times by having contacts with
different sections of society, gathering, checking and counter-checking intelligence, and
enhancing the level of preparedness, which can ultimately prevent the breakdown of public
order. Effective implementation of regulatory laws by all public agencies will increase their
compliance and thereby also assist in mitigating the factors leading to disorder.
Measures to be Taken When an Outbreak ofR iot is Apprehended
The administration, especially the police, is put to real test in this phase. Anticipating a riot
requires vital inputs of intelligence as well as alertness and sound judgement particularly
on the part of the police and the Executive Magistrates. Such an apprehension may be on
the basis of past occurrences, some crucial intelligence input, religious festivals especially
including processions, etc. Once it appears that an outbreak of riot is likely, the police has
got powers which can be used to prevent the outbreak. These include:
• Launching security proceedings against the suspects; preventive arrests (Sec 151
CrPC) and preventive detention; depositing firearms;
• Resolving disputes relating to possession of land by using Section 145 CrPC;
• Regulating processions and gatherings;
• Imposing prohibitory orders (Section 144 CrPC); and
• Deploying police in sensitive areas/increased patrolling and searching of suspected
places.
Security Proceedings
Despite the availability of such wide powers to the authorities to take preventive measures
against those trying to breach public tranquility, the timely, well planned and judicious

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
use of these provisions by the local police and magistracy is often lacking. It is therefore
necessary that the police and especially the Executive Magistrates understand the importance
of these provisions in the maintenance of public order.
Considering the time taken in disposal of civil suits, the preventive and interim nature of
proceedings under the CrPC and the fact that proceedings under this section entail only a
temporary remedy, there does not appear to be any justification to deny the opportunity
of quick redressal to the wronged party on the ground that a civil court is looking at the
long term solution of the dispute. Given the time taken by the average civil suit, there is
always a possibility that one of the parties may take the law into its own hands and cause
a breach of peace by attempting to dislodge the other party of possession. The court of
the Executive Magistrate has a very limited role in cases which does not abrogate from
the undoubted powers of the civil court to adjudicate on questions of title or even issue
declarations on possession, based on detailed examination of evidence. The wholesome
provision of Section 145 CrPC must be permitted to operate in the limited sphere laid
down therein and not further restricted.
Regulating Processions) Demonstrations and Gatherings:
Guidelines need to be framed in advance to lay down the norms of conduct for organizers
and participants of processions and demonstrations. Recourse may be taken to existing
provisions of law to enforce the guidelines, if required. Violation of such guidelines/orders
should entail action under Section 188 IPC. There is a strong case for levying exemplary
'damages' on organizations or individuals found to have instigated rioting and group
violence. The punitive fines may be in proportion to the damage caused and its proceeds
disbursed among the victims.
Imposition ofP rohibitory Orders:
At times prohibitory orders are not strictly enforced. Such a practice may become counter
productive. All violators of prohibitory orders should be prosecuted under Section 188 IPC.
Once prohibitory orders are imposed, all subsequent events should be video-graphed in
sensitive areas. This would act as a deterrent as well as be available as evidence in prosecuting
the offenders.
Measures to be Taken Once a Riot has Started
Despite preventive measures, if violence erupts, the first priority would obviously be to
suppress this violence. In case of communal violence the situation should be brought under
control by effective use of force.

Public Order - Justice for each ... Peace for aLL
The Commissioner of Police or the District Magistrate and the Superintendent of Police
should be given a free hand in dealing with the situation. Unwarranted political interference
should not be allowed at any cost while dealing with mob violence or, later, while investigating
cases. During riots, visits by political leaders should be need based. Any provocative acts
like public display of the dead or wounded should be totally banned. The media should be
briefed with correct facts and figures so that there is no scope for rumour mongering.
Once peace has been restored, relief measures should be taken up immediately. During
extended periods of prohibitory orders, the District Magistrate should ensure that essential
supplies are maintained, especially in the vulnerable areas.
Measures to be Taken Once Normalcy has been Restored
A large number of riots including communal riots are often incited by vested interests.
An obstacle in the speedy investigation of cases related to public order, especially against
the instigators is because of the need to obtain sanction for prosecution under Section 196
CrPC.
It is felt that the sanction prescribed under Section 196 CrPC does not serve any useful
purpose. Once a case is chargesheeted by the police, the magistrate would frame charges
only if there is a prima facie case, and this is adequate and reasonable protection against any
malicious prosecution. Therefore, such sanction should not be necessary for prosecution.
Not infrequently, cases launched against persons for rioting have been sought to be withdrawn
on grounds of 'public interest'. Once a prosecution has been launched against a person for
rioting or other communal offence, it should under no circumstances be withdrawn.
Commissions of Inquiry are usually instituted following large scale riots. It should be
mandated that such Commissions of Inquiry submit their reports within six months and
in no case later than one year. The government should act upon the recommendations
immediately. If for some reason, government does not agree with the recommendations/
observations in the report, it should record its reasons and make them public.
All riots should be documented properly and analysed so that lessons could be drawn from
such experiences.
Inquiry Commissions that are often set up in the aftermath of major public disorder are
a useful tool for the state to deflect public anger but often their proceedings are too long
drawn and their findings too delayed for them to serve any useful purpose. Therefore, a

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
permanent and independent accountability body as proposed by the Commission would
have the twin benefit of affording protection to public servants who act in good faith in
trying to maintain public order and fixing responsibility on those who shirk even their
lawful duties.
The District Magistrate (DM) is the head of district administration and is also responsible
for the maintenance of law and order in the district. The Police Act/State Police Acts give
the DM power of superintendence, direction and control over the district police. An issue
which has been raised often is to what extent, if at all the District Magistrate should control
the District Police. This issue has engaged the attention of almost every Police Commission
and they have given different views.
The Commission is of the view that police administration is very much a part of civil
administration. Diluting the role of the district magistrate is neither desirable nor practical.
Governance requires coordinated efforts ofv arious wings of government and this necessitates
the existence of a coordinating agency. Coordination becomes ineffective if the coordinating
agency has no authority over the departments involved. Moreover, as police represents the
coercive power of the State, there is need to temper this power by a government functionary
who can take a holistic view of the situation. The Commission is however of the view that
this control should not spill over to operational matters for which the District Police Chief
should have full authority and responsibility.
The Commission is of the view that there should be no ambiguity in the role of police
and the District Magistrate. It needs to be provided that the District Magistrate should be
able to issue directions for implementation/ enforcement of laws and government policies
and programmes. It should also be stipulated that such directions shall be binding on the
police.
Capability Building ofE xecutive Magistrates
Executive Magistrates are often inadequately trained to discharge their legal responsibilities
which require them to work closely with the police, be sensitive to the concerns of the
citizens and the police and have a thorough knowledge of laws and rules. As they have to
conduct legal proceedings and pass quasi-judicial orders, it is very necessary that they have
the capability to pass speaking orders, which can withstand judicial scrutiny. This could be
achieved by properly designed training programmes. Besides, having a Manual for Executive
Magistrates, periodically updated, on the lines of the police manual would go a long way
in guiding them in their tasks.
.1

Public Order - Justice for each ... Peace for all
Inter-Agency Coordination
In the districts, the institution of the District Magistrate provides a forum for effective
coordination, though over the years, its efficacy has been eroded. In bigger cities there is
no formal coordination mechanism.
Some states have notified Ministers to be in charge of districts. At times, such authorities
transgress their powers and issue operational directions to the law enforcement machinery.
This practice needs to be discouraged.
In bigger cities, which have the Police Commissioner System, there is no effective
coordination mechanism. In urban areas there are a large number of service providers and
proper coordination becomes very important in situations of crisis or a major law and order
situation. It would be desirable to create a permanent structure to ensure such coordination.
The Mayor assisted by the Municipal Commissioner and the Police Commissioner should
be directly responsible for any crisis management. The same structure should be used for
coordination during law and order problems also, with all the service providers being
represented on the Coordination Committee, to be headed by the Mayor.
Adoption ofZ ero Tolerance Strategy
Institutionalising a zero tolerance strategy toward offences in the cities requires a combination
of proactive leadership and organisational reforms fused with incentives and penalties
for the field level functionaries. Independent monitoring mechanisms would have to be
evolved which would hold public functionaries answerable for non-enforcement of laws/
rules. A zero tolerance policing strategy should be combined with initiatives to involve the
community in policing and crime prevention functions so that abuse of civil rights and
liberties are avoided.
Reforms in the Criminal Justice System
Role oft he Criminal Justice System
A strong and effective criminal justice system is a fundamental requirement of the Rule
of Law. The criminal justice system comprises the police (investigation), the prosecutor
(prosecution), the courts (trial) and the prison (punishment and reforms). The essence
of an efficient criminal justice system is that the trial of an accused should be swift and
punishment for a criminal should be certain and deterrent. In this regard, our track record
has been rather dismal.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Facilitating Access to Justice - Local Courts
While serious offences require highly skilled and thorough investigation, such high level
of expertise and diligence are not required in most petty offences or offences under local
laws. Efforts are also underway to create a system of local courts with summary procedures
and adequate safeguards of appeal and inspections, to deal with the large number of minor
cases at the local level.
Earlier, there was a system of second class magistrates which worked fairly well. There were
also honorary magistrates and mobile courts. Panchayats and Village Courts were also
empowered to dispense justice in petty cases in some parts of the country. All these no longer
exist except that in some backward areas, Panchayats (mostly caste-dominated) still dispense
justice informally (and illegally). There is, therefore, need for a system oflocal courts which
are easily accessible and which can dispense justice quickly. The Commission is of the view
that, at the present stage of development of our democracy and local governments, it is
desirable to ensure the confidence of the people that local courts form an integral part of the
independent judiciary and are therefore independent of any elected or executive body.
An increase in the number of trial courts could thus be achieved by setting up a number
of local courts. There could be one such court for a population of25,OOO in rural areas (in
urban areas this number could be enhanced). A retired judge or government officer may
be appointed by the District and Sessions Judge in consultation with his two senior-most
colleagues. In order to ensure that justice is dispensed with swiftly, these courts should
follow summary procedures and should have jurisdiction to try criminal cases where the
prescribed punishment is less than one year (and corresponding fine). The High Court
should have the powers to frame rules for the conduct of business of the local courts. In
order to ensure uniformity throughout the country, these courts should be constituted
through a law passed by the Parliament.
Reforms in Investigation
Citizen Friendly Registration of Crimes
The Commission is of the view that since registering the FIR is the first step in the criminal
justice system and unless shortcomings in the registration procedure are set right, other
reforms particularly in the subsequent stages would have limited impact. Therefore, a
system has to be evolved in which registration of FIRs is totally transparent and instances
of refusal to register FIRs are eliminated.

Public Order - Justice for each ... Peace for all
The Commission feels that with the rapid expansion of communication facilities, especially
the internet, all types of communications to a police station should be taken cognisance of.
A complainant should have the option of registering complaints through various modes.
Even after such technological interventions, a large number of people would still go to
police stations for registering their complaints. It would, therefore, be desirable to have a
continuous video-recording of the citizen-police interaction in a police station and such
videos should be monitored randomly by the supervising officers.
FIRs have drawn a number of court rulings that have tended to give undue importance to
the omission of any salient fact in the FIR even if such omission was due to the disturbed
or confused state of mind of the complainant. As a result, police officers resort to the
malpractice of delaying the FIR in order to obtain additional details because of the inordinate
evidentiary value placed by the courts on the FIR.
The Cr.P.C. may be amended so that-
• Police should be allowed to query the informant to obtain additional details and
clarifications;
• Make it clear that registration of FIR is mandatory, whether or not the alleged
offence has taken place within the jurisdiction of the police station; and
• Allow constituent units of the police station such as police outposts etc to also
record FIRs.
Government and senior police officers quite rightly lay emphasis on keeping the crime
situation under control. Unfortunately, this message has often been misinterpreted down
the line and results in burking to keep the number of cases low. This undue emphasis on
crime statistics to assess performance of a police station thus needs to be discouraged. The
Commission is of the view that a more objective criteria should be evolved for evaluating the
performance of the police station. Emphasis should be on the number of cases successfully
detected and prosecuted and not necessarily on the number of crimes registered.
Inquests
The Commission is of the view that the conduct of inquests should be open and transparent
and involve citizens' groups and professionals, so that proper enquiry is conducted in all
cases of unnatural deaths. Submission of Inquest Reports by the autopsy surgeons within
a specified time may be mandated under law.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
With the implementation of large scale reforms proposed in this Report, it is expected
that police investigation would become much more professional and unbiased and will be
supervised by a body of legal and other experts. The literacy levels in India have improved
tremendously and will improve further. There should therefore be no difficulty in making
witnesses sign their statements. This would bring more seriousness in the witnesses, while
deposing before the police and would reduce the possibility of witnesses turning hostile
at a later stage. The Commission is of the considered view that as a part of the reforms
regarding investigation, Sections 161 and 162 ofCrPC should be amended to provide for
signing of the statement given by witnesses, which would be used for both corroboration
and contradiction. In the case of important witnesses, in addition, there should be audio
or video recording of their statements.
The Commission has suggested wide-ranging reforms in the structure of the police. It has
been proposed that the investigation agency should be separated from the State law and order
agency. It has also been recommended that the investigation agency should be supervised by
an autonomous Board of Investigation. This would ensure that the Investigation Agency is
insulated against any extraneous influences and it would function in a professional manner.
It has also been recommended that the staff of the investigation agency should be specially
trained for their job with emphasis on collecting evidence through use of forensic tools and
eschewing coercive methods. Moreover the Commission has recommended the setting up of
a District Complaints Authority and also a State Police Complaints Authority which would
effectively deal with cases of any misconduct by police. With these elaborate safeguards
there should be no reason to continue to distrust the police with regard to admissibility of
statements made before them. The Commission is of the view that confessions before the
police should be made admissible. The Commission would however recommend certain
additional safeguards similar to those provided under the POTA.
Prosecution
The Commission has already recommended the introduction of a system of District
Attorneys. It is expected that this would improve coordination between the investigation
and prosecution, enhance the quality of prosecutors and increase accountability in the
prosecution machinery.
Trial
The Judge's Obligation to Ascertain the Truth
We have continued with the adversarial criminal justice system inherited from the British as
opposed to the inquisitorial system prevalent in countries such as France. In the adversarial

Public Order - Justice for each ... Peace for all
system the judge allows the prosecution and the defence to present the rival evidences and
contentions and truth is arrived at by the weight of such presentations, whereas in the
inquisitorial system the judge participates in ascertaining the truth.
The Commission is of the view that there is a strong and compelling case for the judge to
question the accused and the witnesses to ascertain the truth and arrive at a just conclusion
based on such questioning along with the other evidence before him. Such a provision is
particularly critical in the trial of terrorism cases and organised crimes which affect society
at large. Amendments to the CrPC, as suggested by the Committee on Reforms of Criminal
Justice System, would go a long way to improve the quality of evidence and therefore of
decisions.
Right to Silence
A central issue facing all criminal justice systems is to strike a balance between the extent
to which an accused could be used as a source of information and his/her right against
self-incrimination.
The Commission is of the view that though there should be a right to silence in all cases
but in cases related to organised crimes and terrorism there is need to empower courts to
draw inference from the silence of the accused. The Commission therefore recommends
that Courts should have power to draw inference from the silence of the accused during
trial in case of specified offence~ like terrorism and organised crime.
Perjury
Chapter XXVI of CrPC deals with provisions pertaining to offences affecting the
administration of justice. Section 344 therein provides for summary procedure for trial for
giving false evidence. The punishment to a person giving false evidence under this Section,
is imprisonment up to three months or fine extending to five hundred rupees, or with
both. Evidently, these provisions are inadequate in checking witnesses turning hostile on
their own volition or through inducement or threat. To act as a deterrent, the punishment
under Section 344 CrPC should be enhanced to a minimum of one year imprisonment.
Further, it should be ensured that the existing perjury laws are effectively applied by the
trial courts without waiting for the main trial to come to a conclusion.
Witness Protection
Witness protection and ensuring the anonymity of witnesses is necessitated by two sets of
factors, one due to cases of intimidation and threats to the personal safety of the witness

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
and, second, due to the particular vulnerability of the witness on account of age, sex or
due to the trauma that he or she may have suffered.
An individual Indian's identity is so inextricably linked with his social group, joint family
and place of origin that it may be practically impossible to extricate him from the same and
relocate him with a fresh identity somewhere else in the country. Consequently, witness
protection programs of that type and scale may not be feasible except in a small number
of very rare cases. Nevertheless, there is need for a statutorily backed witness protection
programme.
Victim Protection
There is a general impression that the criminal justice system favours the accused and the
interests of victims are not protected at all. The victim of a crime is merely a witness in the
entire proceedings since prosecution is a State monopoly. While there are a large number
of safeguards for the accused, there is virtually no special dispensation for victims.
The Commission is of the view that there is need for a law for the protection of victims'
rights. Such a law should recognize the vulnerable position of the victim, respect the
sensitivities of the victim and treat him/her with dignity. The law should also provide that
the prosecution shall consult the victim in case of grant of bail to the accused in heinous
offences. Similarly, even for the release of prisoners on parole the views of the victim must
be taken into account. The law should also explicitly provide for payment of compensation
to the victims and for this purpose a special fund may be created.
Committal Proceedings
The Commission feels that one of the major reasons for declining conviction rates is
because prosecution witnesses turn hostile. In such cases, the witnesses are either won over
or coerced to resile from their earlier statements made before the police. However, if these
statements are recorded on oath before a Magistrate the chances of witnesses resiling from
these statements would be much less. Moreover, if the witness gives contradictory evidence
later, he would also be liable for perjury. Committal proceedings wherein the statements of
the witnesses for the prosecution are promptly recorded should be reintroduced. This may
lead to some delay but the advantages of such proceedings outweigh the disadvantages.
The Commission is in broad agreement with the views of the Committee on Reforms of
Criminal Justice System, and would suggest.

Public Order - Justice for each, , . Peace for all
Sentencing Process
The courts have a wide discretion in deciding the quantum of punishment. It is contended
that such discretion is necessary in order to enable the judge to impose a punishment
depending upon the circumstances of each case. It has been argued however, that there are
instances when such wide discretion has resulted in varying punishments for similar crimes
in similar circumstances.
The Commission is of the view that it is necessary to have a framework of sentencing
guidelines, to ensure similar treatment in similarly placed cases. The Commission also feels
that instead of bringing in such guidelines through a statutory mechanism it would be
better to have them within the judicial framework, specially since some sort of guidelines
have already evolved through judicial decisions.
The Ministry of Home Affairs had circulated a model Bill to the States in 1998 and some
States have adopted new legislation for prisons such as the Rajasthan Prisons Act, 2001.
A new model Jail Manual has also been circulated to all States by the Union Government
in 2003.
The Commission is of the firm view that prison reforms is an integral part of any attempt to
reform our criminal justice system in order to make it more humane and reformative. For
this purpose, the Union and State Governments should be asked to fast-track modernisation,
upgradation and reforms of our prison systems based on the report of the Mulla Committee
and the various legislative proposals mentioned.
There is an urgent need to put in place a non-partisan and professional mechanism for
taking decisions on parole issues rather than leaving it to the discretion of individual
functionaries.
In order to ensure impartiality and uniformity in decision-making, it is felt that an Advisory
Board to be chaired by a retired Judge of the High Court with the State DGP and the IG
(Prisons) as members should be set up to make recommendations to the State Government
on grant of parole to convicts. The recommendations of the Board should normally be
accepted by the State Government. If the State Government differs with the Board, it
should express its difference of opinion in writing and obtain fresh advice of the Board
before taking a final decision in the matter. Similarly, for grant of remission of sentences,
states should constitute Sentence Remission Boards as advisory bodies so that the decisions
on this issue can be taken in an impartial and judicious manner.
., I

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Constitutional Issues and Special Laws
Under our Constitution the responsibility for maintaining public order rests mainly with
the State Governments. This does not dilute the overall constitutional obligation of the
Union Government to preserve order throughout the country.
Obligations oft he Union and States
While there is no doubt that maintenance of public order comes within the domain of
State Governments, at the same time, the Union also has a constitutional responsibility
i.e. to ensure that the government of every state is carried on in accordance with the
provisions of the Constitution. A major breakdown of public order would definitely signal
a constitutional breakdown in the state, and the Union would be well within its rights to
invoke its powers under Article 356 and go to the extent of dismissing an elected State
Government. Once President's Rule is imposed, the Union can deploy and direct the police
and the Union Forces.
The Union in the performance of its duty to protect the state from external aggression
and internal disturbances, can invoke - after passing through various steps - Article 356.
However, this would be an extreme step. Not acting in pursuance of the duty on grounds
of 'constitutional helplessness' would be the other extreme. Therefore the Commission is of
the view that the Union should have unambiguous powers to deploy and direct its Forces
in case of a major public order crisis in a state if the State Government is clearly failing to
meet its constitutional obligation to maintain public order and the rule of law. This is the
underlying principle behind the constitutional provisions and it would be desirable if the
ambiguity relating to this issue is removed.
The Commission has carefully considered this issue and is of the view that a law could be
enacted to empower the Union Government to deploy its forces and to direct such forces
in case of major public order problems, regarding which steps under Article 256 read with
Article 355 have been taken.
At the same time sufficient safeguards need to be provided to prevent partisan misuse of
this provision. The safeguards would also include a step-by-step approach under Articles
256 and 355, explaining the facts and giving directions and requiring the state to adopt
certain measures. Any such deployment of Union Forces should be on a temporary basis
not exceeding three months which could be extended by another three months after

Public Order - Justice for each ... Peace for ~ll
authorisation by Parliament. The law should also lay down the civilian hierarchy which
would control the use of the Forces in such an event. If such a law does not withstand judicial
scrutiny, it is necessary that Entry 2-A of List I is amended to make the position clear. A
similar arrangement exists during the time of elections, when the Election Commission
superintends and controls the state election machinery, for proper conduct of elections.
Federal Crimes
As mentioned earlier, rapid economic development and improvement of transport and
communication infrastructure has added another dimension to crimes. Increasingly, major
crimes like organised crimes, terrorism, trafficking in arms and serious economic offences
have inter-state and even international ramifications and they often threaten national
security. Though 'Criminal law' is in the Concurrent List, 'Police' is in the State List. As
a result the state police investigates all major crimes in the country. Though the Central
Bureau of Investigation has been constituted, it can investigate criminal cases only with the
consent of the respective State Governments. It has been argued that the state police, with
its jurisdiction confined to the respective state finds it difficult to carry out investigations
across state borders.
It would be necessary to put in place appropriate procedures for dealing with such offences.
This would necessitate the enactment of a new law to deal with a category of offences which
have inter-state and national ramifications. This would also facilitate their investigation
by a specialised State or Central agency. The following offences may be included in the
proposed new law:
• Organised Crime
• Terrorism
• Acts threatening national security
• Trafficking in arms and human beings
• Sedition
• Major crimes with inter-state ramifications
• Assassination (including attempts) of major public figures
• Serious economic offences.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Organised Crime
Incidents of organised crime in India are on the increase. These include extortions,
kidnappings for ransom, gun running, illicit trafficking in women and children, narcotics
trade, money laundering using the hawala network etc.
The State of Maharashtra, which for long has borne the brunt of organised crime enacted
a special law called the Maharashtra Control of Organised Crime Act, 1999 (MCOCA).
The Commission feels that it is now essential to have a Central law. Such legislation should
basically follow the pattern of MCOCA by providing for enhanced punishment, special
courts, public prosecutors, authorisation for interception of communication, regulation
and review of such authorisations, special rules of evidence, circumstances under which
confessions to police officers can be admissible in trials, protection of witnesses, forfeiture
and attachment of property, presumption of offence, cognizance of and investigation into
an offence, etc.
Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act, 1958
The Commission feels that the Armed Forces Special Powers Act should be repealed. As
recommended by the Committee to Review the Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act, 1958,
a new chapter VI A could be inserted in the ULPA incorporating the provisions governing
the deployment of armed forces of the Union in aid of civil power. However, the proposed
insertion of Chapter VI A should apply only to the North-East.
Role of Civil Society, Media and Political Parties in Public Order
Civil society is directly involved in the maintenance of public order and the political
leadership and the media play an important role in this. To facilitate this, the State has the
responsibility of creating an enabling environment.
In its Report on Ethics in Governance, the Commission has recommended that citizens be
involved in the assessment and maintenance of ethics in important government institutions
and offices. This would very much apply to police stations and other police offices. Based
on the perception of citizens who have approached the police station for any service, a
periodic rating of all police stations should be done.
The efforts of civil society need to be supported and acknowledged by the administration.
To facilitate their contribution, institutional mechanisms may have to be created. Sometimes
they may require statutory backing.

Public Order - Justice for each ... Peace for all
It is, therefore necessary to ensure that the media is prompt, responsible, sensitive, accurate
and objective in its presentation of news. In the context of maintenance of public order,
the role of the media could go a long way in preventing rumour mongering and incorrect
or mischievous coverage by a small section of the media which could be supportive of
partisan elements.
Given the technological environment in which the media functions today, the fact that there
is no monopoly over sources ofinformation and the need to have an informed public, control
measures are neither feasible nor desirable. Thus, it is incumbent on the administration to
continuously provide the media with immediate, accurate and reliable information so that
the public is not left with gaps in their information which might be filled by sensational
and biased news reporting.
To ensure that government officials interact with the media in a professional manner, media
management modules should be integrated in various training programmes.
In hierarchical structures within the government, interaction with the media is generally
regulated to avoid confusion and contradictions. To overcome such hindrances, officials
should be designated at appropriate levels to interact with the media and their accessibility
should be ensured.
A plethora of social, economic and political issues exist and many grievances of the people
remain unresolved. Political parties should act as a vehicle for mainstreaming such grievances
through participation in the democratic process so that they could be resolved through
discussion and debate. However, when political parties fail to act as the medium of expression
of such concerns, a political vacuum is created which encourages the resolution of issues
through conflict and leads to the breakdown of public order.
"Democratic maturity needs time, patience, and genuine efforts to find rationale answers to
complex problems and willingness to reconcile conflicting views". The Commission hopes
that the political leadership of the country would come together to evolve a consensus on
political conduct which would enable peaceful resolution of conflicts for overall maintenance
of public order.

LOCAL GOVERNANCE
-An InspiringJourney into the Future
The Core Principles
While the State Government continues to have an important and significant role,
appropriate to that level, the Commission considers the core principles in the reforms of
local governance to be: application of the principle of subsidiarity; clear delineation of
functions of local governments vis-a.-vis State Governments and among different tiers of
local governments; effective devolution of these functions and resources accompanied by
capacity-building and accountability; and of rural-urban dichotomy and integrated view
of local services and development through convergence of programmes and agencies and
above all, 'citizen-centricity'.
COMMON ISSUES
The principles governing democratic decentralisation are the same for both rural and urban
areas.
The Constitutional Scheme
The issue ofw hether a firm constitutional directive compelling State Legislatures to empower
local governments effectively is desirable has been a matter of much public debate over the
last decade. Clearly, there is need to empower local governments. Happily, an impressive
political consensus on this issue among political parties across the spectrum exists. However,
when it comes to action, many States seem to feel that the balance of convenience lies
in favour of minimum local empowerment. Given this backdrop a strong constitutional
provision mandating effective empowerment oflocal governments seems both desirable and
necessary. However, there are difficulties in such an approach. First, the autonomy of States
must be respected in bringing about major constitutional amendments. Second, the situation
varies from State to State and the uniform approach could be detrimental to the objective
of local government. Third, the matters listed in the Eleventh and Twelfth Schedules could
not be fully handled by the local governments even in the best of circumstances.
The Commission examined the desirability of reviewing the two Schedules. However, these

Local Governance - An Inspiring Journey into the Future
lists are merely illustrative and in any case, there is need for further functional delineation
between the State Government and local government in respect of most of these matters.
Therefore, the Commission is of the considered view that the two Schedules need not be
revised, but that the fact that they are not exhaustive and are only illustrative should be
recognised.
The Commission is of the considered view that while Articles 243 G and 243 W need to be
strengthened, it is desirable to lay down general principles of empowerment without unduly
restricting the States' freedom of action. In particular, two principles need to be stated in
the Constitution so that the State Legislatures can make laws based on these governing
principles. First, devolution should be based on the broad principle of subsidiarity, and local
governments at the appropriate level should be vested with adequate powers and authority
to enable them to function as institutions of self government in respect of functions that
can be performed by the local level. Second, as matters listed in Eleventh Schedule are
not intended to be wholly transferred to local governments, the empowerment of local
governments should be for functions, which can be performed at the local level.
Presently, most of the States do not have Legislative Councils. Mter the enactment of the
73rd and 74th Constitutional Amendments, a third tier of Government has been created
in the form of the local bodies. The Commission feels that this third tier of Government
should also have a stake in making laws in the State Legislatures. Apart from constituting
Legislative Councils (where they do not exist), the existing Legislative Councils may be
recast as a council for local governments.
Imposing the presence of Members of Parliament and the State Legislature in the Panchayats
would dampen the emergence of local leadership which is a sine qua non for development
of vibrant local governments. Therefore, the Commission is of the view that Members of
Parliament and State Legislatures should not become members of local bodies. This would
endow the local bodies with decision-making capabilities.
The Commission feels that States should be free to decide the composition of Panchayats
and the manner of election to suit their local conditions best. However, the Commission is
of the view that in the States which opt for indirect membership of Intermediate Panchayat
& District Panchayat, whereby the Chairpersons of the lower tiers became members of
higher tiers, and there are no directly elected members, it is desirable to have the Chairperson
directly elected. In other words, in each tier, either the members or the Chairperson should
be directly elected so that the people will get proper representation at different levels.
One important feature of the constitutional scheme oflocal government is the empowerment
of the SC, ST, women and where the States choose so, OBCs through a system of

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
reservations. Already evidence shows that women and weaker sections elected to Panchayats
and Municipalities have performed very creditably. The resultant empowerment of these
sections has been one of the most noteworthy features of local government.
Elections
The Electoral Process
In many States, the powers of delimitation of local government constituencies have been
retained by the Governments. & a result, in many cases, particularly in urban areas, the
SECs have to wait until a delimitation exercise is completed by the State Governments. The
Commission is of the view that a separate Delimitation Commission for local governments
is unnecessary. Independent SECs, especially when appointed as Constitutional authorities,
can easily undertake this exercise and the government can provide the broad guidelines for
delimitation either by law or by Rules.
The Commission is of the view that reservation of constituencies should also be entrusted
to SECs. In respect of the Lok Sabha and the Legislative &semblies, both delimitation and
reservations are decided simultaneously by the Election Commission. It would be better if
the rolls for the Legislative &sembly are used as the basis for local bodies elections also. It
however needs to be emphasised that the electoral rolls for the Legislative &sembly cannot
be used straightaway for local bodies elections because of two reasons: (i) a local body area
may not be exactly the same as the area covered by the electoral roll of a Legislative &sembly;
(ii) the voters' list in case of local bodies elections have to be prepared ward-wise whereas
the voters' list of the Legislative &sembly is part-wise and as a unit a 'ward' is completely
different from a 'Part'.
It has been experienced that 'Parts' are not always compact geographical units because of
which it becomes difficult to use them as the basic unit for the purposes of delimitation of
municipal and village wards (constituencies). The Commission is, therefore, of the view
that a 'Part' should be defined to be a compact geographical unit. Then a "Building Blocks"
approach can be used so that a ward comprises one or more integral Parts.
The Commission is of the view that local government laws in all States should provide
for adoption of the Assembly electoral rolls for local governments without any revision of
names by SECs. For such a process to be effective, it is also necessary to ensure that the
voter registration and preparation of electoral rolls by the Election Commission of India
is based on geographic contiguity. Similarly, the electoral divisions for elections to local
bodies should follow the Building Blocks approach.

Local Governance - An Inspiring Journey into the Future
Rotation of reservations becomes necessary given the complexity and high percentage of
reservation of seats. However, frequent rotation denies to the elected representatives, an
opportunity to gain experience and grow in stature. Considering these facts, the Commission
is of the view that reservation of seats should be in a manner that leads to effective
empowerment and not numerical and notional representation. This can be accomplished
through the following three broad approaches:
First, the rotation can be after at least two terms of five years so that there is possibility of
longevity of leadership and nurturing of constituencies. In Tamil Nadu, this approach has
been adopted. However, with multiple reservations this may lead to large sections being
denied the opportunity of reservation for a generation or more.
Second, instead of single-member constituencies, elections can be held to multi-member
constituencies. Several seats can be combined in a territorial constituency in a manner that
the number of seats allocation for each disadvantaged section remains the same in each
election in that constituency. Elections can then be held by the List System so that parties
get representation in proportion to votes obtained. Alternatively, members may be elected
on the basis of votes obtained individually. In either case, the law should clearly specify
the required number of members to be elected from each reserved category. The 1952-57
Lok Sabha/State Assembly elections were conducted in 2 or 3-member constituencies.
Maharashtra has adopted multi-member constituencies for elections in Panchayats.
Third, if the office of the Chairperson/Chief Executive is elected directly by popular vote
there is greater pool of talent available from the disadvantaged sections and leadership can
be nurtured and developed. The Commission's recommendations to give the States the
flexibility in the composition of Panchayats and the manner of elections would address
this problem.
In most States, DPCs/MPCs have not been constituted. As per Article 243 ZD, at least
80% of members of DPC shall be elected by and from amongst the elected members of
the Panchayat at the district level and of the Municipalities in the district in proportion to
the ratio between the population of the rural areas and of the urban areas in the district. In
case of MPCs, at least two-third of the members shall be elected by and from amongst the
elected members of the Municipalities and Chairpersons ofPanchayats in the Metropolitan
area in proportion to the ratio between the population of the municipalities and of the
Panchayats in that area (Article 243ZE). This process involves giving weightage to the votes
proportional to the population and timely conduct of elections. The Commission, therefore,
feels that the conduct of elections for the elected members of these bodies should also be
entrusted to the SECs.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Constitution oft he State Election Commission
There is no doubt that State Election Commissions must discharge their functions in a
totally 'neutral' manner. Moreover, the Commissioner should be a person with impeccable
credentials. The Election Commission should have enough autonomy and powers to
resist all extraneous 'pressures'. The Commission is of the view that the SEC should also
be appointed on the recommendations of a collegium comprising the Chief Minister, the
Speaker and the Leader of Opposition in the Legislative Assembly.
The Commission strongly believes that an effective institutional mechanism should be
evolved and strengthened to bring the Election Commission of India and the SECs on one
platform. This will facilitate regular interaction, logistical coordination, infrastructure sharing
and technical support to the SECs. It will also help SECs draw upon the institutional strength
and credibility the Election Commission of India has established over the decades.
Th~ Constitution had laid down provisions for delimitation of constituencies after every
census so that the population-seat ratio is maintained. The increase in population has not
been uniform throughout the country. Moreover the high rate of rural to urban migration has
increased the population of urban constituencies much faster than their rural counterparts.
As a result, on an average the number of electorates in an urban constituency is much
higher than in rural constituencies. The freeze imposed by the Forty-second Amendment
and further extended by the Eighty-fourth Amendment, on the total number of seats in the
House of the People and the Legislative Assemblies is quite understandable, as it seeks to
help the objectives of family planning. But within the number of seats allotted to a State,
it would be desirable to carry out the adjustment of such seats.
Such an exercise would set right the imbalance between the urban and rural electorate and
would help in getting the focus of legislators on urban issues along with the rural issues.
Functions of Local Governments
Devolution ofP owers and Responsibilities
The overriding intention of Articles 243G and 243w is that powers and authority may be
so devolved as to enable Panchayats and Municipalities to function as institutions of self
government. For this, they may also be empowered to prepare local plans for economic
development and social justice and to implement schemes/perform functions including
those listed in the relevant Schedules.

Local Governance - An Inspiring Journey into the Future
In this respect, there is need to identify practical steps for effective empowerment of local
governments, in addition to strengthening the constitutional provisions ofA rticle 243. There
are two areas which need special attention. First, Articles 243 Nand 243 Z F mandate that
all laws which are "inconsistent" with the provisions of Parts IX and X of the Constitution
shall continue to be in force until such laws are suitably amended to bring them in conformity
with the Constitutions or repealed, or until the expiration of one year from the dates of the
73rd and 74th Constitutional Amendments coming into effect. Most States have not even
identified all the statutes which are inconsistent with Parts IX and X of the Constitution.
Clearly, when the architecture of governance is fundamentally altered, several existing laws
need to be suitably amended and alternative statutory arrangements made.
The Commission is of the view that a fresh, more comprehensive, set of functions should
be laid down for urban bodies, to include all the activities that need to be performed at the
local level. In addition to the functions already listed in the Twelfth Schedule, functions
like school education; public health including community health centres/Area hospitals;
traffic management and civic policing activities; land management, including registration
etc. may also be included.
Framework Law for Local Bodies
In spite of the Constitutional provisions, and observations made by several expert groups
and even by Parliamentary Committees, empowerment oflocal governments in the real sense
has not taken place. Under such circumstances, it becomes the responsibility of the Union
to ensure that the 73rd and the 74th Constitutional Amendments are implemented both in
letter and spirit. This becomes all the more necessary as major development schemes, funded
largely by the Union Government, are being implemented by the local governments.
Local governments fall under the rightful domain of the States. It would not be desirable
to bring this subject in the Concurrent List in order to empower the Union to enact a
'framework law' for the local governments. The Commission is, therefore, of the view that
a 'Framework Law' may be passed by Parliament under Article 252 (power of Parliament
to legislate for two or more States by consent and adoption of such legislation by other
States). The remaining States may then be persuaded to adopt this law. This law should
spell out the rights and duties of the citizen in relation to the local authority and also those
of the local body vis-a-vis the citizen. It would also provide broad principles for detailing
of activities at the third tier. Equally importantly, the model law must lay down guidelines
for devolution of responsibilities, powers and functions, by the States.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Devolution of Funds
Finances ofL ocal Governments
The local bodies are heavily dependant on State Governments for financial inflows, because
the proceeds of various buoyant taxes like State Excise, VAT and Motor Vehicles Tax
form part of the Consolidated Fund of the State. The major sources of income for local
governments like property tax etc. are woefully inadequate to meet their obligations both
due to their inherent nature and inefficiency in collecting them. This asymmetry between
the taxation power and the responsibility to provide civic amenities necessitates transfer of
funds from the State to the local governments either through untied grants or through a
share in other State Taxes or as part of various development schemes.
The State Finance Commission (SFC)
The Twelfth Finance Commission examined the functioning of the State Finance
Commissions in great detail and made some very important recommendations. One of
the important recommendations of the Twelfth Finance Commission (TFC) pertains to
the time span for setting up of the SFCs, the time allowed for submission of its report,
time limits for action taken report and synchronisation of its award period with that of
the Central Finance Commission.
The recommendations of the Central Finance Commissions are not mandatory but from the
beginning, successive Union Governments have established a healthy tradition of accepting
the devolution package suggested by the Finance Commission. In effect, therefore, these
recommendations have become mandatory. However, this tradition has not been established
in the States. The healthy precedent established by the Union Government in generally
accepting the devolution proposals made by the Union Finance Commission should also
be followed by the State Governments with regard to the recommendations of the State
Finance Commissions.
With the Thirteenth Finance Commission likely to be constituted in 2007/2008, it would
be appropriate to advise that all States appoint their State Finance Commissions in advance
so that the reports of the State Finance Commissions are available for the consideration
of the Central Finance Commission. This Commission, therefore, feels that State Finance
Commissions should be set up with the periodicity of five years as required by the
Constitution, but equally importantly, that they should be set up in time across the country,
so that, as recommended by the Twelfth Finance Commission, their recommendations can
be taken into consideration by the Central Finance Commission.

Local Governance - An Inspiring Journey into the Future
he Commission also agrees with the recommendations of the Twelfth Finance Commission
that each State should prescribe through an Act the qualifications of persons eligible to be
appointed as Members of the State Finance Commission, on the lines of the Central Act.
The proposed "framework law" may cover this aspect also.
The task of the State Finance Commissions is undoubtedly complex. The Commission is
of the view that the State Finance Commissions should link the devolution of funds to the
level! quality of civic amenities that the citizens could expect. This approach would also
help to bring about some uniformity in the quality of services provided by different local
bodies.
Although SFCs, while making their recommendations about devolution of funds also
give their recommendations on other matters affecting the resources of the local bodies,
there has not been adequate emphasis on the outcomes of such devolutions. Local bodies
focus their attention on getting the maximum possible funds from the State, and in the
process, other recommendations which seek to enhance the resources of the local bodies
such as improvement in their own tax base, higher efficiency in tax collection, economy
in expenditures, reduction of surplus staff etc do not get due attention. As a result, the
recommendations of the SFCs do not get implemented in totality and the outcomes are
therefore sub-optimal. The Commission is of the view that the SFCs should carry out a
more thorough analysis of the finances oflocal bodies and make concrete recommendations
for improvements in their working. In case of smaller local bodies, such recommendations
could be broad based, but in case oflarger local governments such recommendations would
need to be more specific.
A substantial portion of the revenues of the local bodies goes towards meeting the
establishment expenditure. The SFCs should evolve norms for expenditure on establishment
for different local bodies.
Monitoring the implementation of the recommendations of the SFCs has generally been
weak. It is necessary that a mechanism is put in place which reviews the implementation of
all the recommendations of the SFCs. An Action Taken Report must be tabled in the State
Legislature within six months, and this should be followed up with an annual statement on
the devolution made and grants given to individual urban bodies, through an appendix to
the State budget documents. If considered necessary, the devolution of funds could be made
conditional to local bodies agreeing to implement the recommendations of the SFCs.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Capacity Buildingfor Self Governance
It is clear that sustained, well planned 'enabling exercises' need to be undertaken to ensure
that the implementing agencies have the capacity and the capability to deal with the
challenges in undertaking and implementing these major national programmes apart from
being able to fulfill their statutory functions.
Organisational capacity building would include designing appropriate structures within the
organisation, re-engineering internal processes, delegation of authority and responsibility,
creation of an enabling legal framework, developing management information systems,
institutionalising reward and punishment systems and adopting sound human resource
management practices.
Organisational capacity building should not be taken to mean that the organisation acquires
all the skills and knowledge required to perform its tasks. Prudence demands that any
organisation should have the capability of tapping such skills rather than spending a large
amount of resources in acquiring such skills themselves. Evolving partnerships, developing
networks and outsourcing functions are all methods of enhancing the capability of an
organisation.
The Commission also believes that adequate staffing of local bodies is a matter that requires
considerable attention of the State Finance Commissions.
The State Finance Commissions, therefore, need to be vested with the responsibility of
suggesting 'staffing norms' for various levels and categories of local bodies to determine the
optimum or desirable degree of outsourcing of functions. Failure to take a holistic view of
this approach is often responsible for outsourced functions (particularly in the sphere of
public health and sanitation) becoming a source of public dissatisfaction.
While State Institutes of Rural Development and other institutions involved in training
Panchayat functionaries have been imparting training to the 'target beneficiaries', these are
generally limited to areas like Panchayat and Municipal laws, rudiments of book keeping,
account codes and office procedures. Clearly, much more is required for capacity building
and skills-inculcation beyond such routine measures.
The 73rd Constitutional Amendment provides for minimum of33% reservation of women
in elective posts, thus putting over one million women in positions ofleadership. However,
because of entrenched gender bias, there are still many instances of women Panchayat
members encountering obstruction and exclusion and lacking self-confidence as also
adequate knowledge of their duties and responsibilities. There is still need to give special

Local Governance - An Inspiring Journey into the Future
attention to capacity building of women panchayat leaders and members so that they are
truly equipped to carry out their envisaged role in the third tier of government.
There is a clear need to bring about a 'networking' of the existing training institutions
in various subjects like financial management, rural development, disaster management
and general management to formulate compendia of training methodology and training
modules to build institutional and individual capacities. There is a strong case for the Union
Ministries of Panchayati Raj and Urban Development to initiate funding of specific 'key'
training programmes. It is equally important that training should be mainstreamed in the
a~tivity mapping of organisations so as to be a continuing activity.
Activities like applied and action research, case studies, documentation of major initiatives
and evaluation of important interventions need special focus. Further, some of the l~rger,
better endowed local bodies may be in a position to commission and finance academic
initiatives and they should be encouraged to take action in this field. The primary
responsibility in this behalf must rest with the State and Union Governments through
funding under suitable state/national schemes. The research and higher education funding
establishment must also playa role to provide encouragement to 'purely academic' research
on topics with implications for the functions performed by local bodies.
As a result of decentralisation, local bodies have become responsible for a number of services.
One of the difficulties they face is the lack of specialised and technical skills required for these
services pertaining to engineering design, project management, maintenance of high-tech
equipment, accounting etc. It would, therefore, be appropriate if a common pool of such
expertise is maintained either by a federation of local bodies or by professional agencies
which can be accessed by local bodies on demand and payment.
Planning at the District Level
There is also considerable confusion about the district plans. One type of confusion relates to
its nature: is it a collection of the Panchayat and Municipal plans? What are the things that
cannot be addressed at the micro-levels of Gram Panchayats, Intermediate Panchayats and
the Municipalities, but require a macro-view for proper appreciation of the problems and
issues? Settled answers to these questions are not yet available. The other type of confusion
relates to the domain of planning. Will the district plans consist of only those functions
which have been devolved to the local bodies? Should such plans also accommodate the
activities of the State Government that are not devolved to the local bodies, because they
may have an impact on the economy, society or the physical environment of the district?
In other words, is there a need for congruence between the perception of the higher level

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
government and that of the local governments in preparing a development plan for a
district? In case of conflict, how should this be resolved? For districts with substantial urban
areas, where Development Authorities now carry out town planning functions by statute,
the issue of parallel planning bodies working in isolation also arises. In this context, it is
necessary to introduce more clarity in the concept of the district plan. The real essence of
the district plan has to be in ensuring integrated planning for the rural and urban areas in
the district and not to view it as a collection of urban and panchayat plans.
In a regime of multi-level planning, providing knowledge and skills to different levels is
a problem that needs to be addressed. The idea of establishing a dedicated centre in each
district for providing such inputs to the local bodies may be considered. Closely associated
to this, is the need to ensure a two-way process of flow of information from the higher levels
of government to the local governments and vice versa. In an era of advanced information
technology, this should not be difficult.
The National Planning Commission has recently issued guidelines to ensure that the
concept of planning from below, as envisaged in the Constitution, is realised in practice.
The guidelines envisage preparation of a vision document for the district by the District
Planning Committee in consultation with the local government institutions. Among other
things, this document will analyse the progress of the district in different sectors, identifY
the reasons for backwardness and indicate interventions for addressing the problems. The
document will thus provide a framework for preparation of plans by the local government
institutions.
Decentralised planning should involve a process of decentralised consultations and stock
taking exercise followed by· a planning exercise at each local body level and then the
consolidation and integration exercise. The vision should be articulated at every level of
local governance. The Expert Group on Planning at Grassroots level headed by Shri V.
Ramachandran has gone into great detail regarding the planning process at all levels viz.
Gram Panchayat level, Intermediate level and the District level. Their recommendations have
been accepted by the Ministry ofPanchayati Raj and the Ministry is strictly monitoring its
implementation. Specifically, with regard to the measures needed to strengthen the capacity
of the DPCs, the Expert Group has made detailed recommendations.
Rural-Urban Divide and Long-Term Role ofDPC vis-a-vis District Council
The Commission is of the view that of all the institutions created by the 73rd/74th
Constitutional Amendments, the District Planning Committee (DPC) is one, which in
most States, has so far failed to emerge as an effective institution. Some States have not

Local Governance - An Inspiring Journey into the Future
formed the DPC. Besides, there are some inherent problems with this institution. In a
developmental State, planning is an essential function of government at any level. Creating a
separate authority independent of the structures of governance for undertaking the exercise
of development planning has no logic. The DPC is the only body in the decentralisation
scheme of the Constitution where up to one-fifth of the total members can be nominated.
A nominated member can also be the Chairperson of the DPC. Nomination could be used
as a convenient tool available to the ruling party of a State to induct members on narrow
political considerations. Some States have the system of nominating a minister as head of the
Committee, thus converting the DPC into a power centre that is stronger than the elected
local bodies. Also, the DPC is a stand-alone committee within the Panchayat-Municipal
system and there is no organic linkage between the two. Being constituted partly through
indirect election and partly by nomination, it is neither accountable to the people directly,
nor to the PRI-Municipal system. With all these weaknesses, the DPC in its present form
is hardly able to make any contribution to the process of democratic decentralisation. The
situation is compounded by the fact that separate 'district plans' are required to be prepared
for each of the major Centrally Sponsored Schemes.
District Council- Relevance vis a vis DPCs
It is urged in some quarters that in the strict sense of the term, only the Gram Panchayat
and the Municipality qualify for being regarded as local governments. It is also significant
that powers of taxation, which is an indicator of governmental authority, is enjoyed by
these two bodies among all the local bodies. On the other hand, traditionally, the district
has been an indispensable unit of our country's administration. Hence, if democratisation
of local administration is the goal, then there has to be a representative body at the district
level. Therein lies the justification for having a District Panchayat or Zila Parishad, as it is
called in most States.
The urban areas on the other hand have a separate local government system in the form of
municipalities or corporations. There are institutional linkages between different tiers of
Panchayats, the chairpersons of the lower tiers being members of the higher tiers. Urban
local bodies, on the other hand, function independently and remain detached not only
from each other but also from the Panchayat system.
The institutional arrangement under which Panchayats cater to the rural areas and the
Municipalities to the urban areas only, may work at the micro-level of villages and towns.
When it comes to the level of the district, the distinction disappears. A development plan
for the whole district, for example, has to take into consideration both rural and urban
areas. A district plan is something more than the two sets of separate plans -one consisting

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
of micro-plans for rural areas and the other comprising plans for individual towns. As one
moves from the micro-levels to the meso-and macro-levels, perspectives and priorities of
plans change. The Constitution recognises this and accordingly prescribes that the district
plan, as distinguished from the individual Panchayat and Municipal plans, should have
regard to 'matters of common interest between the Panchayats and the Municipalities'.
This, in other words, means that the development needs of the rural and urban areas
should be dealt with in an integrated manner and, therefore, the district plan, which is a
plan for a large area consisting of villages and towns, should take into account such factors
as 'spatial planning', sharing of 'physical and natural resources', integrated development
of infrastructure' and 'environmental conservation' [Article 243ZD(3)]. All these are
important, because the relationship between villages and towns is complementary. One
needs the other. Many functions that the towns perform as seats of industry, trade and
business and as providers of various services, including higher education, specialised health
care services, communications etc have an impact on the development and welfare of rural
people. Similarly, the orderly growth of the urban centre is dependent on the kind of organic
linkage it establishes with its rural hinterland.
In the decentralised regime, there is thus need for a body which can coordinate between
the individual rural and urban local bodies and at the same time take the responsibility of
such tasks of local administration as cannot be discharged by the individual local bodies.
The DPC is an inappropriate institution for this. In this context the concept of district
government becomes relevant. It is felt that the District Panchayat or Zila Parishad can
be perfectly fitted into the role of district government by expanding its jurisdiction to the
whole district. Its members may be elected by the people of both rural and urban areas.
Under such a scheme, the rural-urban distinction among local government institutions
will remain for individual municipalities and the Panchayats up to the intermediate level.
At the district level, the distinction will disappear and the local government institution at
that level will represent rural as well as the urban people. The present office of the District
Collector may be converted into the Chief Officer of such a District Government fully
accountable to the elected District Government in all local matters.
A committee dedicated to the task of planning will, however, be necessary for coordination
of the planning exercises of various local bodies, providing technical guidelines to them,
examining the local plans for ensuring technical and financial viability and for preventing
overlapping and duplication of schemes and for preparation of the district plan. Such a
committee may function under the district council.
For the metropolitan areas, which often encompass more than one district, an alternative
institutional structure in the form of a Metropolitan Planning Committee has been

Local Governance - An Inspiring Journey into the Future
mandated by the Constitution and its planning functions will have to be harmoniously
dovetailed with the DPC/District council framework.
Planning for Urban Areas
Multiplicity ofP lanning Authorities
At present, we are in a transitional phase where urban spatial planning in most cities
involves a multiplicity of agencies whereas the constitutional provisions appear to broadly
envisage local level planning by local bodies and regional planning by the DPCs and MPCs.
Government of India's conditionalities under the JNNURM scheme are, however, helping
States to accelerate the transition to a regime where ULBs gain full jurisdiction over town
planning functions.
For the metropolitan areas in particular, there is an additional issue of how the two
committees i.e. the District Planning Committee and the Metropolitan Planning Committee
(DPC and MPC) would interface with each other in different scenarios. Urbanisable area
for particular metropolitan cities could extend to more than one district and the setting up
of DPCs and MPCs without delineating their jurisdictions, may only lead to confusion.
The difficulty with MPCs is also that they have a peripheral outreach that extends into
rural areas. There are also issues of externalities. Some of the urban facilities have a larger
clientele outside its area or a source which is outside its jurisdiction. It would be useful to
dovetail the views and interests of the rural district, which is its immediate hinterland, into
the Metropolitan Planning Committee. Another aspect is the future relationship between
the two, and the "ownership" in Government of these two institutions. In the Government
of India, for example, the Ministry of Urban Development is responsible for MPCs while
'district planning' is with the Ministry ofPanchayati Raj. In most States, there is a similar
problem of coordination. Clearly this would be even more acutely a difficulty in the field.
Presently, a Zila Parishad has jurisdiction in certain matters that extend into the cities.
Should there be a difference of opinion between an MPC and a neighbouring DPC, who
would be the decision-maker?
One possible option would be for the State Government to notify the jurisdiction of the
MPCs in such a manner that all districts falling within its fully urbanised or urbanising (peri
urban) boundaries would come under one MPC and no D PC for such districtsl portions
of districts need be constituted. This would ensure that there will be a single planning
authority for the entire metropolitan area to be duly notified by the State Government,
with no competing DPC. And to further ensure integration of the planning function, the
planning resources in terms of technical and human resources of the existing Development
,. I

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Authorities for these metropolitan areas may be integrated with the secretariats of the
concerned DPC/MPC. Taking into consideration the need for coordination, it may also be
necessary to have Chairpersons ofPanchayats and of the local bodies in the MPCs. For this
purpose, the Presidents of the neighbouring Zila Panchayats concerned and the Chairmen
of the adjacent District Planning Committees (or District Councils) should be ex-officio
members of the Metropolitan Planning Committee. This principle, of a single planning
authority, will apply even if the DPC is conceived not as an independent planning body,
as is currently laid down in the Constitution; but as an adjunct planning office reporting
to a representative District government (whether such district government is called the
District Council or District Panchayat or Zila Parishad). In that scenario also, for the
Metropolitan areas whose urban footprint encompasses several districts, an MPC alone
may be constituted with representation from the District Councils/Zila Parishads/District
Panchayats that fall within its urban-peri-urban boundaries. In any case, there would be
no need for a DPC for these areas.
Accountability and Transparency
Need for Effective Accountability
Since power is prone to corruption and abuse, there is need for effective instruments of
accountability to be able to check abuse of power and give citizens a voice in improving
the quality of services.
Institutional Mechanisms to Ensure Propriety
The first requirement of ensuring accountability in local bodies is to provide for robust
institutional mechanisms. Such mechanisms would basically relate to audit, State
Government control and an independent grievance redressal body.
It may therefore be desirable to consider introducing some of the best practices of good
governance prescribed for the corporate sector into the public sector. One such practice is the
appointment of an audit committee by the State Government with independent members
of proven integrity and professional competence and with appropriate oversight powers.
The Commission is of the view that the audit committee must have independence, access
to all information, ability to communicate with technical experts and accountability to the
public. Once the District Councils are formed, a special committee of the District Council
may examine the audit reports and other financial statements of the local bodies within
the district. This committee may also be authorised to fix responsibility for financial lapses.
In respect of the audit reports of the District Council itself, a special committee of the
I .

Local Governance - An Inspiring Journey into the Future
Legislative Council may discharge a similar function. The audit committee should report
to the respective local body.
Legislative Oversight: Howsoever independent the third tier of governance may become,
it should still be responsible to the State Legislature. The Commission is of the considered
view that legislative supervision can be ensured by institutionalising a separate Committee
on Local Bodies in the State Legislature. This Committee may also function in the manner
of the Parliamentary Public Accounts Committee as recommended in this Report while
dealing with 'Accounts and Audit' .
. Independent C!rievance Redressal Mechanism (Local Body Ombudsman)
Apart from the above, there is need for institutionalising a grievance redressal mechanism
which would address complaints regarding elected functionaries and officials of the local
bodies. This would provide a platform to the citizens for voicing their complaints and also
bring out the deficiencies in the system for suitable remedial action. The Commission in its
Fourth Report on "Ethics in Governance" was of the view that a local body Ombudsman
should be constituted for a group of districts to look into complaints of corruption and
maladministration against functionaries oflocal bodies, both elected members and officials.
The Ombudsman should have the authority to investigate cases and submit report to
competent authorities for taking action. Such competent authorities should normally take
action as recommended. In case of disagreement, reasons must be recorded in writing and
be placed in the public domain. These would require amendments in the respective State
. Panchayat Acts and the Urban Local Bodies Acts to include provisions pertaining to the
local body Ombudsman.
The Commission further feels that the local body Ombudsman should be a single-member
body. The Ombudsman may be appointed by a Committee consisting of the Chief Minister
of the State, the Speaker of the State Legislative Assembly and the Leader of the Opposition
in the Legislative Assembly. The Ombudsman should be selected from a panel of eminent
persons of impeccable integrity who should not be serving government officials. The
Commission is also of the view that in case a group of districts has a metropolitan city in
its fold, then a separate Ombudsman may be constituted for the metropolitan local body,
that is, in addition to the Ombudsman for that group of districts.
In case of complaints and grievances against a local body in general or its elected members
with regard to corruption and maladministration, the local body Ombudsman should
have powers to investigate into the matter and forward its report to the Lokayukta who
shall further recommend it to the Governor of the State. In case of non-acceptance of the

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
recommendations made by the Ombudsman, the reasons for doing so should be placed
in the public domain by the State Government. Time limits may be described for the
Ombudsman to complete its investigations into complaints.
As far as complaints related to infringements of law governing elections to these local
bodies are concerned, the State Election Commissioner (SEC) would be the appropriate
authority to investigate in the matter. The SEC should submit its report on such matters
to the Governor of the State who shall act on his/her advice.
Measures to Improve Responsiveness oft he Local Bodies to the People
Delegation of Functions: To make the lowest functionary accountable and to inculcate
responsibility at the cutting edge level, there has to be delegation of functions to the lowest
possible functionary in the local bodies. This would make the local bodies responsive in
their interface with the common man.
In-house Mechanism for Redressal of Grievances: While audit and governmental control
are necessary for making the local bodies accountable and an independent grievance
redressal body would provide the citizens with the much needed instrument for enforcing
accountability, the local bodies themselves should be in a position to learn from mistakes
and mould themselves according to the needs of the people. This would require a robust
in-house mechanism for redressal of grievances.
Social Audit
Institutionalising a system of social audit is essential for improving local service delivery
and for ensuring compliance with laws and regulations. An effective system of social audit
will have to be based on two precepts; first, that service standards are made public through
citizens' charters and second, that periodic suo motu disclosure is made on attainment
of service delivery standards by the local bodies. The suggestions of the Expert Group on
'Planning at Grass Roots level' in this regard are endorsed by the Commission.
Transparency
Suo motu disclosure of information, especially with regard to duties, functions, financial
transactions and resolutions should become the norm for all the local bodies as provided
under the RTI Act, 2005. Several local bodies have developed there own transparency
mechanisms (see Box 3.7). Such practices may also be adopted by other local bodies.

Local Governance - An Inspiring Journey into the Future
Evaluation ofP erformance ofL ocal Bodies
Evaluation of the performance of local bodies may also be attempted from the viewpoint
of the citizens. This essentially brings the concept of 'feedback mechanism' to the fore. The
feedback could consist of indicating a satisfaction score on the categories mentioned above.
The collation of these feedbacks would provide a 'Citizens' Report Card' on the performance
of the local bodies. The Commission feels ,that such methods of a participatory nature which
are now recognised the world over as a means of improving governance, service delivery
and empowerment should be increasingly adopted as accountability tools.
Accounting and Audit
The Ministry of Urban Development, Government of India in association with the Office of
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India, has have brought out a National Municipal
Accounts Manual (NMAM) for the ULBs. The accounts of the ULBs are now to be prepared
on accrual basis as prescribed under NMAM. The Ministry of Urban Development has
prescribed the procedure for formalising these standards. The Commission is of the view
that this Manual should be adopted by the State Governments for use by the urban local
bodies.
In order to ensure transparency, professional competence and accountability in the process
of certification of accounts, the Commission is of the view that the C&AG should prescribe
guidelines for empanelment of Chartered Accountants like, qualification of members, length
of existence and experience of firms, number of partners, etc. Further, it is also felt that for
the proper conduct of audit, detailed guidelines would also be required to be prescribed
by the C&AG as is the practice in the case of the Companies Act. It needs to be kept in
mind that the audit to be done by the Local Fund Audit or the C&AG in discharge of their
responsibilities would be different and in addition to this audit.
As of 31 st March, 2007, out of 24 States where the 73rd and 74th Constitutional
Amendments are applicable, full entrustment of the role of providing 'Technical Guidance
and Supervision' (TGS) over audit and accounts of PRIs and ULBs to C&AG has been·
made by 19 States. Given the enormity of the task of maintenance of accounts and audit
of all the PRIs and ULBs in the States and the concomitant technical requirements, the
Commission is of the considered view that the entrustment of technical supervision over the
maintenance of accounts and audit ofPRIs and ULBs should be institutionalised through
a provision in the respective laws governing the local bodies and the accounting formats
and standards may be provided by way of Rules.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Similarly, the accounts and budget formats for PRIs prescribed by C&AG have been
accepted and formal orders issued by 11 States, though 22 States have positively responded.
The format developed for PRIs is basically a simple receipt and payment account on
cash basis accompanied by key statements that take care of the items of accrued income
and expenditure. The format ensures that all the functions which have been devolved
or are likely to be devolved by the States to the Panchayats are properly classified. It is
also in synchronisation with the classification codes at the State and National level. The
Commission would like to emphasise upon what has already been recommended in the
Sixth Round Table of the Ministers in-charge of Panchayati Raj held in November 2004
at Guwahati - the formats for the Panchayats should be simple and comprehensible to the
elected representatives.
The Commission is of the view that the role of the C&AG should be limited to technical
guidance and supervision and not extend to details. In fact, there is a case for institutionalising
the independence of the Director of Local Fund Audit (DLFA) so that it could function
as a specialised body devoted to the audit of the accounts of the local bodies. This would
enhance the stature of the DLFAs with a positive impact on the quality of audit and on
accountability. The Commission feels that to achieve this, the head of the body responsible
for Local Fund Audit should be appointed by the State Government after selection from a
panel vetted by the C&AG. Further, to strengthen the arrangements for providing technical
guidance and supervision by the C&AG, release of Finance Commission Grants to local
bodies be made conditional on the acceptance by the States of such arrangements.
Apart from the statutory audit performed by the DLFA or such other designated authority
of the State Government, audit of certain local bodies in a State would come under the
purview of Section 14 of the C&AG's (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) Act, 1971.
In terms of this Section, where any body or authority is substantially financed by grants
or loans from the Consolidated Fund of India or of any State or of any Union Territory
having a Legislative Assembly, the C&AG shall audit all receipts and expenditure of that
body or authority. For the purposes of this Section, if the grant or loan is not less than
rupees twenty five lakhs and is not less than 75% of the total expenditure of such body
or authority, it would be deemed to be substantially financed. In case of bodies receiving
grants or loans not less than Rupees one crore in a financial year, the Section provides that
the C&AG may, with the previous approval of the President or the Governor of a State or
the Administrator of a Union Territory having a Legislative Assembly, audit all receipts and
expenditure. The Commission is of the view that the final decision on the matter should
be left to the States.

Local Governance - An Inspiring Journey into the Future
Accountability requires that corrective action is taken promptly on audit reports so as to
increase the effectiveness of the local government. The audit reports on local bodies should be
placed before the State Legislature and these should be considered by a separate Committee
of the State Legislature constituted on the lines of the Public Accounts Committee. The
access to relevant informationlrecords to DLFAJdesignated authority for conducting audit
or the C&AG should also be ensured by incorporating suitable provisions in the State Laws
governing local bodies.
In order to match the above standards with regard to accounts and audit, local bodies
particularly the PRIs will need to be suitably strengthened by making skilled professionals
available to them. The States should take up appropriate capacity ~uilding measures so that
the PRIs and ULBs are able to cope with the audit of these institutions.
With the progressive increase in capacity of the local bodies and reliability of the audit
mechanism, a system of performance audit should also be gradually introduced. For this
purpose, suitable parameters should be developed. This would strengthen the functioning
of the local bodies and bring in elements of much desired accountability.
Technology and Local Governance
Information and Communication Technology
Information and Communication Technology provides tools which could be utilised by
the local governments for simplifying cumbersome processes, reducing contact between
the cutting edge functionaries and the citizens, enhancing accountability and transparency
and providing single window service delivery for a variety of services.
The Commission is of the view that the local governments should also utilise the facilities
provided by space technology to prepare an information base and for delivery of services
through resource centres.
RURAL GOVERNANCE
Institutional Reforms
There is need for States to re-examine Gram Panchayat delimitation so as to aim for greater
efficiency of scale in delivery of services. Many of the Gram Panchayats are too small to
function as autonomous institutions of local government. In order to be an economically

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
viable administrative unit, capable of discharging multiple responsibilities, a Gram Panchayat
needs to have a minimum population size. Since there is no data on this issue, it is difficult to
give a definite recommendation as to what should be the optimum size of a Gram Panchayat.
But it can be emphasised that a tiny Gram Panchayat will not be able to discharge the role
envisaged for it under the present decentralisation plan. The factors that would have to be
taken into consideration for determining the minimum size of a Gram Panchayat are: (a)
potentiality for resource generation, (b) sustainability of the staff structure, (c) suitability as
a unit of planning for core functions, (d) geographical cohesiveness, (e) terrain conditions
and (f) communication facility within the Panchayat area.
It is imperative that States with small-sized Gram Panchayats undertake a detailed exercise
to reconstitute them after considering the factors mentioned above.
Ward Sabha - Its Necessity
The Commission is of the view that in order to have effective popular participation at
the micro level, the large Gram Panchayats should be split into a number of wards/ areas.
Representing a unit of smaller habitation or cluster, the Ward Sabha will provide a platform
where people can directly discuss their needs and prepare an area specific local plan. The
Ward Sabha can exercise certain powers and functions of the Gram Sabha and also some
powers and functions of the Gram Panchayats may be entrusted to them. If possible, the
territorial division of a Gram Panchayat Member may be made coterminus with jurisdiction
of the Ward Sabha. A simple amendment in the respective State Panchayat Act can introduce
this provision.
Panchayats as the government at the local level, should have their own staff. They should
have full powers with regard to recruitment and service conditions of their employees within
a broad framework of State laws and certain standards.
Purely as a transitional measure, till the personnel structure of PRIs takes a definite shape,
the employees of the State Government may be taken on deputation, but such deputation
should be made after the consent of the borrowing Panchayat.
In all the States a detailed review of the staffing pattern on a zero based approach should be
undertaken within the next one year. The Zila Parishads, particularly, should be associated
with this exercise. The 'ownership' of those working for local bodies must lie with these
bodies.

Local Governance - An Inspiring Journey into the Future
P RIs and the State Government
The power of the State Government to suspend or remove elected Panchayat representatives
needs closer scrutiny. There have been many instances of arbitrary use of this power. In some
States the higher tier of Paneh aya t is either consulted or given the authority to exercise this
power in respect of office bearers or members of the lower tier. The Commission is of the
view that this provision is inappropriate because all the tiers ofPanchayats are institutions of
self government and, as such, there cannot be any hierarchic relationship between them.
Deviant behaviour, maladministration, violation of fiscal responsibility norms, irregular!
illegal transfer of Paneh aya t property, abuse/misuse of authority, corruption and nepotism
are some of the situations which may warrant action against the PRIs or their elected
representatives. h is also the responsibility of the State Government to ensure that the
Panchayats carry out their activities in accordance with law within their autonomous
domain. But it is also necessary to ensure that this 'responsibility' does not translate into
administrative supervision or control over the functioning of the Panchayats. As far as
election related issues are concerned, the Constitution itself provides for creation of a 'State
Election Commission' in each State. For any grievance or complaint relating to election
law infringements, this institution should be the authority to take a final decision and
send it to the Governor. Further, the Commission has recommended establishment of an
independent grievance redressal mechanism in form of 'local Ombudsman' for a group of
neighbouring districts. Whenever a complaint is made against a Panchayat or any of its
members to the local Ombudsman, he will examine the matter and will send his report
through Lokayukta to Governor of the State.
There can also be a situation where there is an absolute breakdown of administrative and
legal machinery at the level of a Panchayat and the elected body concerned needs to be
immediately suspended or dissolved. Even in such cases, the State Government would need
to place the records before the local Ombudsman for investigation and appropriate action
as detailed above. In all cases of disagreement with the recommendations made by the local
Ombudsman/Lokayukta, the reasons will need to be placed in the public domain.
Position ofP arastatals
Parastatals are institutions/organizations which are wholly or partially owned and managed
by government (either autonomous or quasi-governmental). They may be formed either
under specific State enactments or under the Societies Registration Act. Since activities of
.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
many of these organisations are in the matters in the Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution,
their separate existence with considerable fund and staff at their disposal, is an impediment
to effective functioning and empowerment of local government institutions.
Some of the important parastatals are District Rural Development Agency (D RDA), District
Health Society (DHS), District Water and Sanitation Committee (DWSC) and the Fish
Farmers Development Agency (FFDA). At the higher levels, some of the parastatals are
the State Water & Sewerage Board, the State Electricity Board, Khadi & Village Industries
Commission (KVIC) and the State Primary Education Board. Their functions impinge
directly on the local institutions.
The most important parastatal at the district level is the DRDA. The Commission is of the
view that since the process of democratic decentralisation is now firmly established in the
districts and Panchayats with elected representatives being in place at all the three levels,
there is no justification for having a separate agency as the DRDA in the district.
Similar is the case with the District Water & Sanitation Committee (DWSC) which deals
with the rural water supply and sanitation schemes. The Commission is of the view that
since as democratically elected institutions, Panchayats are responsible for these functions
to the citizens in the rural areas, DWSC should be a committee of the District Panchayat.
A committee at the block level may also be needed to monitor this programme. If so, this
committee should be a body of the Intermediate Panchayat. Besides, many of the States have
also created a high level organisation called State Water and Sewerage Board to look after
both urban as well as rural drinking water supply schemes. Barring a few large investment
schemes which need high grade technical and professional support, the rural water supply
system can be very conveniently handled by the Panchayats. Hence, the presence of the
State Water and Sewerage Board in the rural areas needs to be substantially pruned.
Currently, a district also has a District Health Society (DHS) to look after the programmes
of the National Rural Health Mission (NRHM). A major part of its functions concerns the
rural sector (e.g. running hospitals, primary health centres and dispensaries). These functions
are listed in the Eleventh Schedule and hence this Society has to be responsible to the PRIs
for these activities. Similarly the Fish Farmers Development Agency (FFDA) may have a
separate existence, because its activities do not coincide totally with the activities of the
PRIs. However, keeping in view the potentiality of fish farming as a livelihood programme
in the rural areas, this body also needs to work in close collaboration with different tiers of
Panchayats especially the Gram Panchayat.

Local Governance - An Inspiring Journey into the Future
The parastatals should not be allowed to undermine the functions and authority of the
PRIs. Some of the existing committees may need to be subsumed in the Panchayats and
some of them may be restructured to have an organic relationship with them (Panchayats).
The Union and the State Governments should not normally set up special committees
outside the PRIs. However, if such specialised committees are required to be set-up because
of professional or technical requirements, and if their activities coincide with those listed
and devolved, they should function under the overall supervision and guidance of the
Panchayats. Similarly, Community level bodies should not be created by decisions taken
at higher levels. If considered necessary the initiative for their creation should come from
below and they should be accountable to PRIs.
Functional Devolution:
The Union Government has significant influence on the devolution of functions and
funds upon Panchayats, because of the large fiscal transfers it undertakes to States in the
functional domain of the Panchayats, mainly through Centrally Sponsored Schemes and
Additional Central Assistance (ACAs). The Ministry ofPanchayati Raj has been examining
guidelines of old and new Centrally Sponsored Schemes and suggesting changes to make
them compatible with the functional assignment to Panchayats. However, at the conceptual
stage itself, Ministries will need to undertake Activity Mapping delineating what is to be
done at the Union, State and Panchayat levels.
Activity Mapping can become a trigger for ensuring that Panchayats are on a sound
footing. When Panchayats are assigned clear tasks, devolved funds and made accountable
for their performance of these newly assigned responsibilities, they have a big incentive to
demand the capacity required for effective performance. Thus role clarity catalyses capacity
building from being supply driven to demand driven, which is a huge benefit. Empowered
Panchayats with clear roles assigned through activity mapping would begin to also demand
the staff required for effective performance. Therefore activity mapping can spur appropriate
placement of functionaries for better service delivery.
In order to ensure smooth completion of activity mapping at both State and Union levels,
there is a need to avoid misunderstanding and misinterpretation of the exercise. Care must
be taken to avoid activity mapping to be (a) either construed as a 'sharing of the spoils'
exercise, or (b) an exercise 'disempowering' line departments. The following approaches
may dispel any misgivings in this regard:

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
(i) Undertaking extensive participatory exercises to bring Panchayats and Line
departments together to arrive at a consensus as to what activities should be
devolved to Panchayats,
(ii) Ensuring transparency in the process and developing trusts among different
stakeholders,
(iii) Considering the capacities of Panchayats, prioritising different subjects for
step-wise activity mapping,
(iv) Strict adherence to the objective principles described in this report, while
approaching the matter of activity mapping,
(v) Simultaneously linking activity mapping with (a) mapping of capacity building,
(b) financial requirements and (c) administrative requirements, so that there is a
smooth transition and activity mapping can be immediately operationalised,
(vi) Encouraging for reasons of stability, legislative sanction for activity mapping,
by eventually including it as part of the law.
The Commission is of the view that every State should take up comprehensive activity
mapping with regard to the matters mentioned in the Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution.
While doing so the principles discussed in the preceding paragraphs should be kept in mind.
The progress made so far in this area is far from satisfactory and therefore, it is desirable
that each State should constitute a special task force to complete this work in a time bound
manner. Similarly, the Union Ministries will also need to intensively carry out activity
mapping for all the Centrally Sponsored Schemes with priority on flagship programmes.
Devolving Regulatory Functions to the Panchayats
Since Panchayats are an integral part of the government at the local level, their activities
cannot be confined solely to development programmes. To begin with tasks like issuing birth,
death, caste and residence certificates, enforcing building byelaws, issuing of voter identity
cards, enforcing regulations pertaining to weights and measures would be better performed
by local governments. The Gram Panchayats can play an effective role in community
policing because of their close proximity with the people. Regulatory functions which can
be devolved to the Panchayats should be identified and devolved on a continuous basis.

Local Governance - An Inspiring Journey into the Future
PanchayatFinance
Fiscal Decentralisation
For fiscal decentralization to be effective, finances should match expenditure assignments
related to the transferred activities. This calls for a two fold approach - first demarcation
of a fiscal domain for PRIs to tap resources directly both Tax and Non-tax and second
devolution of funds from the Union and State Governments.
In the Indian context, the concept and practice of local government taxation have not
progressed much since the early days of the British rule. Most of the revenue accrual comes
from taxation of property and profession with minor supplement coming from non-tax
receipts like rent from property and fees for services. The Commission is of the view that a
comprehensive exercise needs to be taken up in this sector on a priority basis. The exercise
will have to simultaneously look into four major aspects of resource mobilisation viz. (i)
potential for taxation (ii) fixation of realistic tax rates (iii) widening of tax base and (iv)
improved collection. This could be one of the terms of reference for the Thirteenth Finance
Commission.
Exploring Additional Sources ofR evenue
Most of the State Acts vest Panchayats with public properties such as irrigation sources, v
ferry ghats, waste land, community lands, orchards and fairs. Vehicle stand charges and
market/s hop/ cart fees are some of the other sectors which need to be tapped effectively by
the PRIs. Thus, all common property resources vested in the Village Panchayats should be
identified and made productive for revenue generation.
Apart from exploring new areas for taxationllevies and productive use of common properties,
gradually the Panchayats could be encouraged to manage some important utilities. This
would be particularly relevant for the higher tiers of Panchayats. They will need to collect
realistic user charges for all such services.
The royalty and other income from minerals such as dead rent, fees, cess and surcharge is
a major source of revenue for the State Government. Conceptually royalty is charged for
letting the lessee consume the wealth belonging to the lessor where the wealth gets depleted
over time. Therefore, the local community represented by the local Panchayat should have
prime right over the income from royalty accrued to the State Government for mining in

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
that area. State Finance Commissions should bear this in mind while finalising devolution
of grants to the rural local bodies.
Apart from allocating substantial share of royalty to the local bodies, the State Government
may also consider empowering them to levy local cess on the royalty so accrued to the
State Government.
Incentivising Better Performance
One of the effective and fair tools to improve revenue collection of the local bodies is to
incentivise their efforts. Panchayats which have shown positive results must be suitably
rewarded. This can be done by linking the Union Finance Commission and State Finance
Commission grants to their own revenue generation efforts. States may also promote
Panchayats to collect revenue by providing bonus payments at specified pre-announced
rates to Panchayats which have demonstrated exemplary collection performance.
The Commission is of the opinion that Village Panchayats must have primary authority
over taxation within the tax domain assigned to PRIs. However, where a unit of assessment
for imposition of taxes is larger or such taxation has inter-Panchayat ramifications, the
higher formations - Intermediate Panchayat and Zila Parish ad should be given concurrent
powers subject to a prescribed ceiling. Running of small power projects, large scale mining
activities, ferry services on a large river, are some of the areas which could be subjected to
taxation by higher tiers. However, whenever a tax/fee is imposed by either the Zila Parishad
or Intermediate Panchayat, such tax or fee should be collected by the concerned Village
Panchayats as if it were a tax or fee imposed by them.
Transparency/Transfer/Allocation ofF unds
With regard to devolution of funds to the local bodies from higher tiers of government,
the Commission holds the view that such transfers need to be unconditional so that the
PRIs are able to take care of the local priorities. The approximate quantum of funds to be
transferred for a block of five years should be indicated to the local bodies in advance so
that the Panchayats can set minimum standards for delivery of services and for attainment
of certain minimum levels in poverty reduction, education, healthcare etc. for the period
of the allocation.
The Commission is of the view that except major Centrally Sponsored Schemes of the
Union Government or special purpose programmes of the States, allocations to PRIs
should be in the form of untied funds so that the PRIs can have some degree of flexibility

Local Governance - An Inspiring Journey into the Future
in expenditure. The allocation order should contain only a brief description of objectives
and expected outcomes. Also while releasing funds, the States should not impose conditions
of utilisation, except those prescribed by the Finance Commission.
Budget Procedure and Transfer ofF unds
The Commission is of the view that the budget indexing and accounting procedure for
allocation of funds by the State Government to PRIs needs to be simplified and made user
and audit-friendly. The Panchayats also need to maintain their accounts with transparency at
. a low cost. Therefore, there should be a separate Panchayat sector line in the state budget.
The State budget under each head should be divided into State-wise allocation and District
wise allocation. The allocation for each district should be shown separately in the district
wise allocation. District allocations under various heads should be brought together which
will evolve into a district budget.
In 2005, the Ministry of Panchayati Raj set up a committee to examine the feasibility of
electronic fund transfer to Panchayats. The committee recommended that it was indeed
feasible to transfer funds rapidly to approximately 2.4lakhs Panchayats across the country
through banks. The Ministry of Panchayati Raj has developed a software on this process.
State Governments should be encouraged to adopt it and speed up their fund transfer
procedure.
The State Government should take steps to release grants to the PRIs according to a pre
fixed time-table so that it becomes possible to utilise the funds during the currency of the
year. The fund release could be in the form of equitably spaced instalments. The release
could be made in two instalments; one at the beginning of the financial year and the other
by the end of September of that year.
PR Is and Access to Credit
Over the years, the demands of the rural sector have shifted from the basics to potable water,
power for irrigation, education, improved healthcare services, physical infrastructure and
agricultural inputs and services. Apart from making efforts to increase revenue realisation
(both tax and non-tax), Panchayats may also need to borrow from banks/financial
institutions. The State Government should encourage such initiatives. The role of the State
Government should remain confined to fixing the limits of borrowing as per the guidelines
of the State Finance Commission.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Local Area Development Schemes
In addition to the regular State Government departments and the three levels ofPanchayats,
the rural areas of many districts are also being serviced by Area Development Authorities/
Rural Development Boards. These organizations receive sizeable grants from both the Union
and the State Governments. This arrangement is anomalous. With popularly elected grass
roots institutions, Panchayats, in place to take care of the local development needs, there can
be very little justification for existence of separate Development Authorities and Boards.
The system of MP and MLA Local Area Development Funds is unethical. The fund gives
the sitting MP or the MLA an added advantage over his rival candidates in brightening his
electoral prospects and denies the opposition candidates a level playing field. Accordingly,
the Commission recommended that schemes such as MPLADS and MLALADS should
be abolished.
In view of the above, the flow of funds to public bodies for development of rural areas
should be exclusively through the Local Government Institutions.
Rural Development
Centrality ofP R Is in the Centrally Sponsored Schemes
Most of the Centrally Sponsored Schemes deal with matters earmarked for Panchayats
under Article 243 G and the Eleventh Schedule of the Constitution. Some examples are
the National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme, Sampoorna Gramin Rojgar Yojana,
Sarva Siksha Abhiyan, National Rural Health Mission, Integrated Child Development
Services, Mid-Day Meal Programme, Drinking Water Mission, Total Sanitation Campaign,
Indira Awas Yojana, Swarna Jayanti Gram Swarogar Yojana, Pradhanmantri Gram Sadak
Yojana, Rajiv Gandhi Grameen Vidyutikaran Yojana, Adult Literacy and the Remote
Village Electrification Programme. Out of this long menu, nine major programmes take
up nearly Rs.65,S75 crores during the year 2007 -OS. Since a large quantum of resources
flows through these schemes to the States, efficient implementation of these programmes is
critical for the States' economic development. In the long run, the schemes taken up under
such programmes also need to find place in the overall development plan of the Panchayat
body. It is, accordingly, essential that the centrality ofPanchayats is recognized in fulfilling
the objectives of these programmes. While some of the schemes do give a crucial role to
the PRIs in their implementation, some bypass them and create separate structures. Even
the schemes which allow the participation of Panchayats, often do not give them enough
flexibility in decision making. Such flexibility is essential to take care of the local specificities,
which strait-jacketed schemes designed from above cannot accommodate.

Local Governance - An Inspiring Journey into the Future
The Commission is of the view that in due course the present system of release of funds
to the CSSs should be substituted with a system where majority of the allocation is in the
form of untied grants. The State and local governments should have flexibility in designing
project components and implementation mechanism to achieve the overall objectives of a
sectoral programme.
Analysis ofsome major Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSSsj:
Monitoring and review of Community and Primary Health Centres (CHC, PHC) and
Sub-centres need to be a routine work of the Panchayatsl and Standing Committees.
Such monitoring and review should cover all parameters enunciated in the vision, goal
and strategy documents of the NRHM. The present practice of installing a centre-wise
managing committee may continue but the practice of separate village committees for
each of the three major components (Public health, Women's Health and Child health)
under departmental command needs to be dispensed with. There should be a single village
committee constituted by the Gram Sabha to look after all the above three aspects of the
rural healthcare system. At the intermediate and district levels too, the Block Committee
and Zila Parish ad themselves should be the implementing and monitoring agencies. At the
district level, there could be an advisory body consisting of sectoral experts to guide the
Zila Parishad from time to time.
Integrating SSA with the PRI system is necessary not only for getting better outcomes from
the project, but also for sustainability of processes and the institutions introduced by it.
Integrated Child Development Scheme (ICDSj
The Commission is of the view that the I CDS programme has to be looked at as a part of the
comprehensive healthcare delivery structure. By skillfully integrating other components of
the system, namely immunization, ante-natal care, family planning and vector control in the
mainstream of healthc are, a composite healthcare machinery for children and women could
be built up in the rural areas. This can be done by transferring the responsibility of the local
level activities of all these components and the management of the local institutions related
to such components (for example, health sub centres, anganwadi centres) to the PRIs.
Mid-day Meal Programme
A national programme of nutritional support to primary education was formally launched
in 1995.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Many of the States have not involved the Village Panchayats in managing this programme,
even though most of them have devolved primary education to these institutions.
Disassociation of the Panchayats from this important programme has caused an institutional
vacuum; implementing agencies at the micro levels have been left alone. In the absence
of participation of the PRIs, the monitoring of this programme has remained weak. The
programme guidelines need to be revised urgently so as to bring it directly under Panchayat
monitoring.
The role of the Panchayats vis-a-vis the Centrally Sponsored Schemes is not yet in line with
the commitment of the 73rd Amendment. The CSSs have to shed their separate vertical
identity and be part of the overall development plan of the Panchayati Raj system. The
Commission feels that there has to be territorial/jurisdictional/functional convergence in
their implementation. The centrality of PRIs in these schemes must be ensured if they are
to deal with matters listed in the Eleventh Schedule. The Gram and Ward Sabha at the
lowest level and the Panchayat Samiti and Zila Parishad at the higher levels have to be the
structures looking after all their activities in terms of implementation, monitoring and social
audit. In the programmes, where the activities percolate to areas and habitations below a
PanchayatiWard level, a small local centre committee should be f~rmed to support these
activities. Such a local committee will only be a deliberative body with responsibility to
provide regular feedback to the Gram Sabha/Ward Sabha and be accountable to it. Even
while formulating such projects, the Union and State Governments need to include elements
of flexibility so that they could be moulded as per local conditions and requirements. The
Ministries concerned should only issue guidelines and the implementational flexibility
should be left to the local bodies. In order to assess the socio-economic impact of these
program~es periodically, a system of outcome monitoring must be put in place. The
National Sample Survey Organisation (NSSO) on being suitably strengthened can be
given this responsibility.
Information Education and Communication - IEC
The Commiss~on is of the view that different modes of communication like the print
media, the visual media, electronic media, folk arts and theatres etc. should be utilised to
create awareness among the rural population. As mentioned earlier, it should be ensured
that there is a convergence in approach to achieve synergies and maximise reach. District
level rural broadcasting should become a full-fledged independent activity of the All India
Radio. To achieve this, apart from covering issues related to Panchayati Raj Institutions
and peoples' participation in local governance, these broadcasts should also focus on issues
related to agriculture and rural development, which concern mainly with the rural areas
and combine it with programmes on the citizens' Right to Information. The mechanism

Local Governance - An Inspiring Journey into the Future
for this should be evolved by the Union Ministry of Information and Broadcasting in
coordination with the Union Ministries ofPanchayati Raj, Rural Development, Agriculture
and other related Ministries.
Role ofP anchayats in Delivery ofS ervices
The following steps are required to ensure the centrality of PRIs in service delivery
programmes:-
• Unbundling the service into activities.
• Assigning clear responsibilities for different aspects of service delivery to agencies
including PRIs - the role could range from planning to supervision and
feedback.
• Placing the resources required for service delivery, both human and financial, with
PRIs.
• Setting standards for services both institutional and otherwise. This has to be
modulated according to available facilities and manpower.
• Preparing service delivery plans by the PRIs based on these standards in respect
of each service, in consultation with the stakeholders and in accordance with the
resources and facilities available. Milestones in upgradation of services in terms
of quality and quantity. Service Delivery Plans could be prepared by institutional
committees consisting of stakeholders, officials, elected representatives and experts
in respect of institutions like hospitals, schools and anganwadis. In respect of other
services, the plans could be prepared in consultation with user groups.
• Publishing the elements of Services Delivery Plans in the form of Citizen Charters
which would indicate the levels of assured services; measurement and feed back
systems and grievance redressal systems.
• Putting in place a community based monitoring system including user groups,
SHG networks and civil society groups to monitor the implementation of Service
Delivery Plans and provide inputs for further improvement.
Resource Centre at the Village Level
Resource Centres at the Village Panchayat level should utilize the potential of educated local
youths in documenting and mapping local resources; soil types; drainage pattern; cropping

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
and animal husbandry practices; water resources; land and farm holding; susceptibility
to natural disasters - documentation of impact, recurrence, rescue, relief and settlement
requirement; rural infrastructure etc. This locally generated information base should be
corroborated through satellite imagery and other space-enabled services.
Once these Resource Centres become operational, they should also be utilized for
documenting in detail, local traditional knowledge, especially about medicine, natural
resource management and agricultural practices; local arts and crafts; folk memories -
ranging from folk tales and lores to local memories about historical events, movements,
people and monuments; community festivals, gatherings, events and folk cultural practices
etc. before they vanish into oblivion.
The Commission feels that setting up space technology enabled Resource Centres at the
Village and Intermediate Panchayat levels all across the country should be on the priority
agenda of the government. This would require substantial capacity building at the local
level. This would, in essence, also necessitate a shift from the currently available generalistic
education at the post-school level, to a skill and technology based system which focuses
on farm & animal husbandry practices, computer applications, commercial cropping and
soil and water management.
Local Government in the Fifth and Sixth Schedule Areas
Local Government in the Fifth Schedule Areas
For decentralization of governance in these areas, government enacted a special legislation
- the Panchayati Raj (Extension to Scheduled Areas) Act in 1996 which extends to all the
notified scheduled areas located in nine States of the country.
PESA and the Union/State Laws
Nine States have amended the respective Panchayati Raj Acts to match them with
requirements of PESA. However, much remains to be done with regard to subject laws
and rules which also need to be modified suitably in accordance with provisions of PESA.
Technically under Section 5 of the PESA Act all such laws have automatically become
invalid after December 12, 1997. But in practice these laws are being still followed by the
State Government machinery. Similarly there is a large number of Union legislations which
need to be hormonised with the provision of PESA.
Since PESA is a Union legislation and a logical extension of the Fifth Schedule, a duty is
cast upon the Union Government to see that the provisions are strictly implemented. In

Local Governance - An Inspiring Journey into the Future
case of reluctance by any State in implementing the provisions of PES A, specific directions
can be issued by the Government of India under Proviso 3 of Part A of the Fifth Schedule
of the Constitution.
PESA and Specific Policies oft he Government/Centrally Sponsored Schemes
There is a large number of Centrally Sponsored Schemes which are not compatible with
PESA e.g. Policy on wastelands, water resources and extraction of minerals. These policies,
as interpreted and implemented, have given rise, on occasions, to confrontations between
the tribal people and the administration. Similarly, the National Policy on Resettlement and
Rehabilitation of Project Affected Persons, 2003, National Water Policy, 2002, National
Minerals Policy, 2003, National Forest Policy, 1988, Wildlife Conservation Strategy 2002
and National Draft Environment Policy, 2004 would also require detailed examination
from the viewpoint of ensuring compliance to the provisions of PESA.
Effective Implementation ofP ESA
The PESA has been in existence since last eleven years, but the response of the States towards
its implementation has been rather slow.
The Commission is of the view that due importance must be given to regular annual reports
from the Governors as stipulated in the Fifth Schedule, Part A(3) of the Constitution.
In tribal areas, though, the society and economy is closely woven around womenfolk, their
involvement at the Village Council/Gram Sabha level is minimal. Special efforts need to
be taken to raise their status in this respect. There is need to make suitable provisions in
the PESA Rules and Guidelines making it mandatory that the quorum of a Gram Sabha
meeting would be acceptable only when out of the members present, at least thirty three
per cent are women.
For effective compliance to legislation and protection of tribal rights. Special measures have
to be taken to strengthen the local administration both in terms ofintellectual enhancement
and skill upgradation. One such measure could be constituting a group in each State to
look into strengthening of the administrative machinery in the Fifth Schedule Areas. This
group can consider important administrative issues such as creation of separate cadres of
employees for the Fifth Schedule Areas, provision of hardship pay/allowance and other
incentives, preferential treatment in accommodation and education etc. and make suitable
recommendations to the State Government. Considering the importance of this exercise,
the funds required for this purpose should be made available by the Union Government
under Article 275 of the Constitution.
l
I

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Effective Implementation oft he Tribal Sub-plan (TSP)
Since last many years, the tribal-sub plan has been a regular feature of the planning exercise
in a State, it has been implemented in a ritualistic manner and treated just as an adjunct of
the State budget. The performance has not been very encouraging, on account of both poor
planning as well as weak implementation. Technically and professionally qualified personnel
who are the sheet anchors of the development process, are reluctant to work in such areas.
For government employees, a posting in these areas is considered to be a punishment. The
situation is further compounded by lack of data; there has been little attempt in the past
to have an impact assessment made. Then, finally, one has to contend with the problem of
extremism which prevails on a large scale in some of these States. The Commission feels
that both the Union as well as State Governments have to take special steps with regard
to (i) creation of a special planning unit for scheduled areas in a State; (ii) special financial
stipulation for the sub plans; (iii) incentivisation and capacity building of government
employees; (iv) impact assessment of the past schemes; and (v) effective monitoring/social
audit of the current programmes.
URBAN GOVERNANCE
Urbanisation and Growth
Trends in Urbanisation
Nearly 20 years have passed since the first National Commission on Urbanisation submitted
its report. During this period, the importance of the urban sector and its contribution to
the national economy and employment has increased manifold while the infrastructural
constraints in our cities have become more acute. While the urban growth has been slower
than anticipated by the National Commission on Urbanisation, the problems identified
still remain valid. Indeed the magnitude and complexities of urban problems have increased
and with that the urgency to reform 'urban governance' The Commission is of the view
that a new National Commission on Urbanisation should be set up to take a holistic and
long-term view of the entire range of policy instruments required to deal with the rapid
urbanisation, including the large cities and to bring about more balanced and efficient
urbanisation in the country.
Structure of Urban Governance
Different Types of Urban Local Governments: The 74th Constitutional Amendment lays
down three types of municipal bodies:

Local Governance - An Inspiring Journey into the Future
1. ' Nagar Panchayat (by whatever name called): This is for a transitional area,
which is transforming itself from being a rural area into an urban area;
2. Municipal Council: This is for "a smaller urban area"; and
3. Municipal Corporation: This is for "a larger urban area".
Implicit in the above classification of urban local governments is the recognition of the
need for variation in the functional domain and requirements depending on the size of the
population they need to serve.
The Constitution does not lay down the parameters for categorising the urban local bodies
into Nagar Panchayat, Municipal Council and Municipal Corporation. This prevents a
uniform pattern of categorisation across the States. The Commission recognises the fact that
the situation in the States varies and that there is a wide range of structures and systems.
The Commission would recommend a common categorisation which might be useful to
reduce the lack of clarity help in adoption of a structured and approach leading to a more
systematic national planning process and in the devolution of funds through National and
State Finance Commissions.
Proposed Basic Structure - Ward Committees and Area Sabhas
Need for Greater Citizen Participation
The Commission has exaD;lined the various structures that exist today, in statutes and in
practice. The existing system has two important lacunae. First, there is very little role that the
average citizen plays in his/her own governance. The second is that the elected representatives
as well as the officials are not sufficiently accountable and this often undermines both
efficiency and transparency.
The representation ratio between citizens and their elected representatives is almost ten
times larger in urban areas. The Gram Sabha gives every rural citizen the opportunity to
participate in local issues. In contrast, the Ward (or Wards) Committees, proposed for urban
bodies have not yet been constituted in some States. And even where constituted, they are
hampered by the combination of various factors. It is necessary to accept the direction in
which demography and habitation trends are moving and push to continue the steps initiated
by the 74th Amendment towards citizens' participation in urban affairs. It is towards this
end that the following structure is proposed for urban local bodies.
III

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
The three tiers of urban local body governance should be as follows:
a. Municipal Council/Corporation (by whatever name it is called);
b. Ward Committees; and
c. Area Committees or Sabhas.
However, in Town Panchayats, there is no need to have three tiers, given the small size and
population of these local bodies.
Area Sabhas
An Area Sabha would cover the citizens who are voters in one or more polling stations, but
preferably not covering more than, say, 2500 voters.
Role of the Area Sabhas: An Area Sabha should be the functional equivalent of the Gram
Sabha in villages. -
Members of the Area Sabha: Every registered voter of a polling booth would be a member
of that Area Sabha. Each Area Sabha would elect, once in five years, a small Committee
of Representatives. The Committee of Representatives would elect one person who would
chair the meetings of the Area Sabha and would represent the Area Sabha in the relevant
Ward Committee. The election of the Committee of Representatives should be held by the
State Election Commission along with the election of Councillors and their term should
be coterminus with that of the Councillors.
Ward Committees
The present system of having a Ward Committee for more than one ward is not logical
and must be given up. There must be a Ward Committee for every ward, each effectively
representing one local political boundary. The Chairpersons of the Area Sabhas included
in the wards would constitute the Ward Committee. The Commission is of the view
that in smaller towns also, with populations of less than 3 lakhs, it is necessary to have
formal mechanisms for citizen participation and local decision making through Ward
Committees.
The Ward Committee members must have regular meetings with the citizens they represent,
through Area Sabhas, to review programmes, their planning and implementation. There
must also be regular meetings of the Committee with elected members from Area Sabhas.
The Committee must have legitimate functions and appropriate financial devolution.
I .•

Local Governance - An Inspiring Journey into the Future
These should cover all the relevant activities that may be delegated by the Legislature or
the Municipal Council.
In urban areas, it is not only the individual voter who needs to be involved, but also non
residential stakeholders, such as businesses. These non-residential stakeholders could be
given some representation at the Ward Committee level, preferably through their business
associations.
Delineation of Functions in the Three Tiers: Just as there is delineation of functions among
the different tiers in rural local governance, similar delineation would have to be done in
case of urban local bodies also. While doing so, the principle of subsidiarity should be
followed. A process of activity mapping similar to the one taken up for PRIs should be
carried out for all ULBs.
Zonal System for Large Cities
Within one large city, a number of zonal offices should be set up. Such zonal offices do exist
in many cities, but, generally do not have adequate delegated powers. The powers of the
city government, covering all decision-making for administrative purposes, can be delegated
and exercised in the zones. Broadly, one zonal office for every five lakh (or less) population,
could be considered. The system could be introduced in all Municipal Corporations within
the next three years.
The Office oft he Mayor/Chairperson
It is desirable to choose the Mayors/Chairpersons through popular mandate in a direct
election. Such a Mayor should have a fixed tenure of five years. The Council should have
powers of budget approval, oversight and framing regulations and major policies.
Role oft he Mayor/Chairperson
Separation of the functions of Chairperson and Mayor at the city and local level is
unnecessary and cumbersome. The Mayor acting as Chairperson will facilitate harmonious
functioning between the council and the executive. In a local government, the focus of
authority should be unified and clearly defined. The Commission therefore recommends
that the elected Mayor should function as both the Chief Executive and the Chairperson
of the Council.
The Commission is of the firm view that executive power must be exercised by the elected
Mayor/Chairperson because basic democratic legitimacy demands that power is exercised

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
by the elected executive. The Mayor/Chairperson should be the Chief Executive of a city or
urban government, and the city government should have the power to appoint all officials
including the Commissioner and to hold them to account.
Some form of cabinet system with functionaries appointed by the Mayor exercising authority
on his behalf in various departments of the executive branch is desirable.
In a city government, the imperatives of separation of powers should be tempered by the
need for greater harmony between the elected council and the Mayor. The Commission
recommends that a Mayor's 'cabinet', chosen by the elected Mayor from among the
councillors, should be constituted in all municipal corporations. The size of this cabinet
should not exceed ten per cent of the strength of the council, or fifteen, whichever is higher.
Such a cabinet will function directly under the control and supervision of the Mayor.
Management Structure of Urban Local Governments
1he Commissioner
The elected Mayor/Chairperson is accountable to the electorate. This accountability
should also have commensurate authority over the staff of the local government. The
Mayor/Chairperson should, accordingly, have a final say in the matter of appointment
of the Commissioner/Chief Officer. However, in order to ensure that the right person is
selected, the State must lay down, by law, the procedure and qualifications for selection
and appointment to this post.
The responsibility for selection and appointment of the Commissioner may be given to the
Metropolitan Corporations and Municipal Corporations within a period of two years. For
all other ULGs, this should be possible in three years' time. Selection could be done by the
Mayor from a panel of names, which could be prepared by a bipartisan Committee to be
set up by the Council/Corporation. Appointment should be for a minimum period to be
extended based on performance. During such time as the Commissioners/Chief Officers
are deputed by the State Government, selection of the Commissioner should be from a
panel of names, from which the Mayor could select an officer.
Staffing ofM unicipalities
Ultimately all municipal bodies should have the power to appoint their own staff. State
Governments may, however, lay down the procedure and the principles of making such

Local Governance - An Inspiring Journey into the Future
appointments. The existing State-wide municipal cadres may continue for the present but
no fresh recruitments need be made to such cadres.
Some States also have Directorates of Municipal Administration. The present system of
the Directorate of Municipal Administration exercising supervision over the local bodies
intrudes into the autonomy of the ULBs. Organisations like Directorates of Municipal
Administration come in the way of true decentralisation and should be abolished.
Urban Finances
Property Tax Reforms
The Commission is of the view that the Union Government should pursue the matter
with the States to ensure that all States switch over to either the 'unit area' or 'capital value'
method in a time bound manner. The categories of properties exempted from property tax
need to be revisited and minimised. In order to ensure that unauthorised constructions do
not escape the tax net, State laws should stipulate that levy of tax on any property would
not confer any right of ownership in case the property has been constructed in violation
of any law. Property tax details for all properties should be placed in the public domain to
avoid any type of collusion between the assessing authority and the property owner. State
laws should also provide for tax on properties belonging to the municipal authorities, but
which are given on lease. Similarly, the law should provide for levy of service charge on
properties belonging to the Union and State Governments.
A periodic physical verification of the properties and taxes levied on them should be
carried out in each municipal area by a separate wing directly under the control of the
Chief Executive. Besides, randomly selected cases of assessment should be audited by
the government auditors as is done by C&AG in case of Union and State taxes. As both
the 'unit area method' and the 'capital value method' are based on the principles of self
assessment, the law should provide for exemplary penalties in cases of suppression of facts
by property owners.
Octroi
In terms of administrative efficiency, Octroi breeds delays in the movement of goods and is
neither transparent nor efficient. Octroi should be abolished, but at·the same time, States
should evolve mechanisms to compensate the local bodies for the loss in revenue as a result
of such abolition.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Other Taxes
Professional Tax has the potential of generating significant resources for the local governments.
The upper ceiling of Rs.2500, on the tax rate prescribed under the Constitution {Article
276(2)} limits the potential of this tax. There is need to amend this Article to enhance the
upper limit on the professional Tax. The Commission recommends that certain principles
should be followed in the administration of taxes. These principles are - (i) The levy of tax
should be made totally transparent and objective, (ii) the cost of collection for the local
body and the cost of compliance for the tax payers should be reduced to a minimum, (iii)
there should be an independent unit under the Chief Executive to monitor the collection
of all taxes, and (iv) as far as possible, all levies should be based on self-declaration of the tax
payer but this should be accompanied by stringent penalties in case of fraud or suppression
of facts by the tax payer.
Non-Tax Revenues
This Commission is of the view that the levy and collection of appropriate user charges
must be encouraged. For this, a significant portion of grants to the municipalities may be
linked with their own efforts at resource raising.
The 'User pays' principle is applicable to a large number of services. But there are services
where the individual user is not identifiable and the services are of a collective nature. In
such cases, recourse should be made to 'Betterment levy'. A good example of a levy on
'Polluter pays' principle would be traffic congestion. It is, therefore, necessary to carry out
an impact study for all major developments, and a 'congestion' charge' may be levied which
could then be used to take steps to ease congestion.
In several types of cases pertaining to the violation of civic laws the power to impose spot
fines should be given to the municipal authorities. Another reason for poor compliance
of civic laws is the relatively non-deterrent nature of penalties prescribed. Therefore, the
punishment prescribed for all civic offences need to be revisited and modified.
Borrowings
The Commission would recommend that municipal bodies should be encouraged to raise
their own resources. Any borrowing, be it term loans from financial institutions or market
borrowings, could be adopted by the municipal bodies depending upon their capability.
Initially, borrowings appear attractive as they improve the liquidity of these bodies in
I,

Local Governance - An Inspiring Journey into the Future
the short run. But it need to be ensured that the deployment of resources is in economic
activities. State support would, however, be required by smaller local bodies. Such bodies
would need to be given State guarantee or in the alternative pooled financing mechanisms
would have to be put in place.
Leveraging Land as a Resource
Municipal bodies often have a wide range of assets on their balance sheets ranging from
infrastructure net works to public buildings, from housing to municipal shopping centers
as well as land. In view of the recommendation of this Commission that development
authorities should be merged with concerned ULBs and their technical/planning manpower
subsumed with the DPCs and MPCs; the substantial land holdings of the development
authorities should also eventually come under municipal ownership. With spiralling prices
of land in cities, it is extremely necessary that these assets are managed properly.
Sale of public urban land in India is dominated by development authorities and has neither
been instrumental in fiscal decentralisation to the local level nor have they contributed
significantly to the municipality's capital budget.
In economic terms, municipalities have to not only leverage land as a resource but also avoid
the fiscal risk of becoming dependent upon asset sales for covering their recurring costs
(and delaying politically difficult decisions on users' charges). They must use the proceeds
of land sales mainly to finance investment and capital works.
Most municipal bodies have a large number of properties given on rents or lease. However,
the earnings out of these properties are quite low. This is primarily because of litigations by
the current occupiers who neither pay the market rent nor vacate the premises. Respective
municipal laws should provide that any built up property of municipal bodies shall not
be given on rent for more than a period beyond 5 years and after expiry of the prescribed
period the property shall be given on rent only through a competitive process.
A basic necessity for leveraging land for revenue generation is the proper upkeep of land
records. The increasing population density and real estate prices in urban areas underlines
the importance of proper land management systems in urban areas.
Infrastructure and Service Provision
Types ofS ervices Provided by Urban Local Bodies
Deficiencies in urban infrastructure are a major bottleneck for economic growth. The stress
••
created by inadequate services and facilities compounded by weak governance adversely
~ I

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
affects the quality of life of all citizens. Urban services can be broadly classified into three
categories:
a. Regulatory services;
b. Infrastructural services and
c. Social services
The Commission believes that improvements in the availability and accessibility of these
services would result in qualitative improvement in the daily lives of urban citizens.
Regulatory Services
Objectivity: In most of the regulatory functions performed by local governments, it is
possible to minimise, if not totally eliminate discretion. Assessment of property tax is one
such:-example. Where it is not possible to eliminate discretion, then the exercise of such
discreti~n should be bound by well-defined guidelines.
Convergence: Different services are provided by different departments oflocal governments,
agencies of State Government and parastatals. This multiplicity of service providers, forces
citizens to access each one of these separately. Creation of 'one stop service centres' can
address this problem besides expediting processing of requests of citizens.
Speedy Disposal: All applications for regulatory approvals must be disposed off within a
specific time frame. A citizen's charter laying down specific deadlines for disposal of different
categories of applications should be prescribed. The charter should also specify the relief
available to the citizens if the charter is not adhered to.
To avoid delays by the functionaries in processing applications, a system of deemed
sanctions after the expiry of self imposed time limits should be adopted. A system of
voluntary compliance backed up with stringent penalties for violations should be put in
place. For example, in respect of approval of building permits, a system of self-certification
by registered architects (particularly for residential units) followed by approvals over the
counter, should be made mandatory.
Infrastructure Services
Creating a Responsive Institutional Framework
Allocation of responsibility and accountability between the urban local bodies and the State
Government departments/parastatals has to be clearly demarcated. To an extent, the larger
State Government agency may have a final responsibility and .ownership, at least of those

Local Governance - An Inspiring Journey into the Future
services and utilities which have a presence beyond the ULB jurisdiction. But wherever,
and to the extent it is possible to demarcate the managerial and technical "boundaries" of
a civic activity, it should be possible to earmark responsibility to a local body.
In other words, all 'downstream activities' of a particular utility, within the jurisdiction of
a ULB should ideally become the activity of the ULB. In a Metropolitan Corporation, for
example the distribution of water should primarily be the responsiblity of the local body.
This task could be undertaken by the local body itself or through an agency such as the Water
Supply Board. In such cases, the head of the Water Supply Board should be responsible to
the Mayor for all activities related to distribution of water. In other words, the functionaries
of the parastatals have to accountable to the Municipal Council.
Ulater Supply
Management of water supply should be the primary function of a municipal body. The
Commission has recommended that in respect of all downstream activities of a particular
utility, as soon as they enter the geographical and administrative boundary of an urban
local body, the Government utility/parastatal should become accountable to the ULB. In
general, water supply boards are financially more autonomous and have built up higher
levels of technical capacities as compared to Municipal Corporations other than the very
large corporations such as Mumbai. Therefore, the transfer of these responsibilities from
parastatals to the ULBs would have to be appropriately phased in with capacity building
of the ULBs. Thus while the largest Corporations should certainly take charge of the entire
gamut of water supply from development to distribution, for most local bodies a phased
transfer of responsibilities for management of the distribution networks within their
territorial jurisdiction while leaving source development to the parastatal agency would
appear to be the most feasible arrangement.
Tariff There is understandable reluctance on the part of local governments to pass on
the actual costs to consumers. The gap between the revenues and costs of water supply
prevents the municipal hodies from making any substantial investments on improving or
even maintaining the quality.
The Commission has recommended that the SFCs should carry out a more thorough analysis
of the finances of local bodies and make concrete recommendations for improvements in
their working. This should necessarily include detailed analysis of water supply systems of
the local governments. The SFCs should lay down principles for fixation of water tariffs
and its periodic revision. The underlying approach should be the recovery of at least full
running costs of these services.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Water supply schemes have to be environmentally sustainable. With a burgeoning urban
population, the traditional water sources are inadequate to meet the requirements. As a
result, new sources have to be developed, but this raises the cost of water. Local bodies
need to prepare infrastructure development plans which should be integrated with the
CDPs. In order to reduce the strain on the urban water supply systems, the demand could
be tempered by adopting water harvesting measures and recycling of waste water for non
potable purposes. Municipal bye-laws should initially provide incentives for the adoption
of such practices and progressively make them compulsory for all buildings.
Sewerage Management
Sewerage systems along with treatment facilities are capital intensive. While granting
approvals to new lay-outs, it should be ensured that adequate provisions for internal sewerage
systems are made and enforced. Local bodies may even impose a cess on the property tax or
development charges in order to raise resources for expansion and capacity enhancement
of the existing sewerage systems. In order to motivate the local governments to generate
additional resources for sewerage management, matching grants may be provided by the
Union and State Governments.
The Commission recommends that a separate user charge be introduced in all municipalities,
even as a minimum levy, for sanitation and sewerage, as distinct from water charges. It is
necessary to emphasise the need to redeploy these funds into operation and maintenance
of the sewerage system.
The Commission notes that the provision ofw ater and sanitation within the slums is skewed
very strongly towards notified slums. In the case oflatrines, 17 per cent of people in notified
slums do not have access to latrines, while the percentage is 51 in the case of non-notified
slums. In some States, the situation is abysmal. This is an area of concern, as certain basic
steps to prevent human degradation cannot be based on notification of areas.
Several NGOs and civic society groups have set up 'pay and use toilets', especially in slum
areas. Co-production of sanitary services has been tried successfully in slum areas. The
concept includes setting up of a CBO (Community Based Organisation) at the grass roots,
carrying out IEC activities, collecting:;l significant percentage of the initial capital cost from
the beneficiary followed by the con~truction of a collective toilet block. Such efforts need
to be encouraged by municipal governments by providing appropriate incentives. Sewerage
facilities have to be provided in slum areas on a priority basis by the municipal bodies.

Local Governance - An Inspiring Journey into the Future
Solid 'Waste Management
The management of waste has three basic components: (a) collection (b) segregation for
different types of disposal and (c) disposal. The first lends itself to community participation
and also privatisation and must be made a part of the activities of Area Sabhas and local
NGOs/CBOs who may charge for this. A large number of community based systems of
garbage collection have been tried in different cities. These need to be scaled up. The second
component requires segregation into categories for different types of disposal. Unfortunately,
our pattern of disposal is mainly one of indiscriminate dumping. It is essential to initiate a
civic programme especially in the larger cities to segregate household waste according to its
degradability. This would ease the burden on civic authorities. The third component is that
of efficient disposal, which can also be carried out either by the local bodies themselves or
with private sector participation. The Municipal Solid Wastes (Management and Handling)
Rules, 2000 prescribe the manner of disposal of solid wastes. It is important that b~fore any
task is outsourced, municipal bodies develop the capacity for managing such contracts.
Scavenging
The Commission is of the firm view that national urban renewal and manual scavenging
should not and cannot co-habit the same space. Intensive Surveys should be carried out
by the State Local Governments to identify manual scavengers and estimate the number
of dry latrines in existence within six months. Following this, separately earmarked funds
should be allocated to address and remove this abomination within a one year time frame.
Central Assistance to States Annual Plan should be tied to this. Funds allocated under the
JNNURM should also be linked to it.
Power Utilities and Municipal Bodies
An option could be to hand over distribution of power to the municipal bodies; however,
with the existing organisational and technical capabilities of the municipal bodies, this may
not be possible. Therefore, as a pre-requisite, the capacity of the municipal bodies needs
to be enhanced, and then in a phased manner they could take over the function of power
distribution, starting with small manageable areas within their jurisdiction.
Municipal bodies can also playa major role in proper planning of the distribution networks
along with other networks like water supply and telecommunication. Common ducts could
be planned by the municipal bodies for all these networks and even charges could be levied
on the users of these ducts. The local bodies can also help in the power conservation efforts
by incorporating power conservation features in the building bye-laws.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Services for Human Development
Education
Irrespective of whether schools for the common people are run by the government or the
local bodies, the biggest challenge is to impart quality education. Data indicates that basic
facilities such as blackboards, furniture and recreational as also toilet facilities, especially for
girls, were inadequate in most schools run by government agencies though interestingly,
more of a problem in government schools than in municipal ones. It is necessary that all
schools are made functionally self-sufficient, in as much as the basic facilities and classroom
requirements are provided in all urban schools within the next two years.
Attempts must be made also to recruit better teachers. Since an appropriate salary is
difficult for the ULBs to provide, it should be increasingly necessary for the municipalities,
especially the larger ones, to seek the help of NGOs and individual volunteers. Indeed,
it would be useful to initiate a voluntary service element to our social sector to improve
service delivery.
Crafting a credible service delivery system requires a shift from a system that provides
employment guarantees to the service providers to one that provides service guarantees to
the citizens. Accountability in such anew system should lie with local governments and
local institutions/Societies/Management committees.
Public Health
Private health care plays a critical role in bridging a need gap for the urban population. The
trend in urban areas to shift towards private healthcare needs to be seen as an opportunity by
the city ~uthorities. It gives them an opportunity to concentrate on public health as distinct
from clinical services, and on preventive and not only curative aspects of healthcare.
Public health is dependent on primary health care systems, nutrition, safe drinking water,
and sanitation and health education. The Commission, therefore, feels that convergence of
these services is as important as upgradation of primary health c~re in urban areas. There
should be a task force in each local government responsible for all services which impact
public health, with members from the State Government and other agencies in the field
of public health.
Schools and hospitals require more financial resources to improve performance but they also
require institutional autonomy and flexibility to deliver guaranteed service outcomes. The
role of the head of the institution has to be strengthened in a fra~ework of decentralisation

Local Governance - An Inspiring Journey into the Future
that allows for account~bility to local communities. Flexibility in meeting local needs within
a framework that guarantees certain minimum service delivery standards also requires a
shift from non-accountable State level recruitment to accountable local government and
local institution level recruitment.
For all services provided by the local governments there is need to develop a set of performance
indicators. The existing set of performance indicators, wherever they exist, are not sufficient
to monitor all important aspects of service delivery. The emphasis in these indicators has to
be on quality -of service and reliability. A closely linked aspect for improving the quality of
services is maintenance of a reliable database about all the municipal services at the District,
State and National level. This would also help in monitoring of these services as well as
taking important policy decisions.
Urban Transport Management
The Commission recommends that, in keeping with the national policy, in each Metropolitan
Corporation, a Metropolitan Transportation Authority should be set up with appropriate
powers, so as to integrate and coordinate city transport systems. Thus, a single Authority, by
whatever name or structure, must become the repository of all responsibility and authority
within the municipal limits for all transportation related activities and decision making. The
national policy talks of a Unified Metropolitan Transport Authority (UMTA) in metropolitan
cities for coordinated planning of urban transport. But what is also required is a common
ticketing and fare system for different modes of public transport and their integration so
that they complement and not compete with one another. To make that happen, UMTAs
will need powers to regulate all modes of transport, decide on routes for each operator, fix
fares, service standards, etc. In addition, UMTAs will need financial powers and resources
to give financial support to operators on unviable routes.
Introduction of mass transit systems has to be carefully conceptualised as the investments
required are quite large as is their socio-economic impact. All such systems should be
meticulously planned. This requires a high degree of administrative and professional
competence amongst officials handling the project. Therefore, capacity building of concerned
officials is extremely important. Moreover, mass transit systems should not be planned and
implemented in isolation. A holistic approach is necessary. An integrated transport system
has various dimensions. In its widest sense it requires:
• Coherence between transport, land use and other social and economic policies
• Consistent resource allocation criteria between transport modes

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
• Consistent budgeting across all modes and services
• Rational pricing, including externalities
• A coherent multi-modal system of regulation
• Design of services and facilities to reflect their individual strengths
• Facilities for easy interchange between modes and services
• Common fares and ticketing
• Co-ordinated timetabling where practicable
• Multi-modal passenger information
Public - Private Partnership in Public Transport: Involving the private sector in public
transport helps in bringing in capital as well as managerial efficiencies. Various models of
public-private partnership are possible. These are 'tendering of routes', wet lease of buses
and outsourcing of specific services. Several similar projects have been funded under
JNNURM. The pre-requisites for a successful public private partnership are a meticulously
structured agreement between the two parties and complete transparency and objectivity
in the selection of the private partner and enforcement of the agreement.
jNNURM - A Reform Process
The implementation of JNNURM is just picking up; however, certain aspects of the
programme need consideration. The first aspect, indeed, is the requirement of funds and
the funding pattern.
According to the CDPs prepared by 43 cities, that is just two thirds of the project cities, the
cost of projects would be of the order of Rs 211,348 crores. On the same per capita basis,
the total investment needs projected for all 63 cities and towns is Rs. 339,902 crores.
The per capita project costs vary drastically across the States, both in total terms and under
different infrastructure segments.
It can be a matter of debate as to why one State should get more than twice the amount
per capita than another State. But that may happen if, say, the cost of supplying safe water
per person is higher in one State than in another. But the need to balance the distribution
of scarce funds remains an imperative. And the first, essential priority must be certification

Local Governance - An Inspiring Journey into the Future
by the States that drinking water and sanitation needs, on the lines of the millennium
development goals, have been met.
While the demand driven approach that underpins JNNURM has much to commend
itself, it it imperative that its limitations too are taken note of. A study reveals that the
predominant share in projects under the Scheme belong to the urban transport sector.
This has worrying implications for other equally important sectors' like sanitation. Further,
the stipulation of the urban local body raising the prescribed share of investment cost,
irrespective of the sector has similar implications. The Commission therefore feels that for
sectors like sanitation, that have broader social and environmental benefits, there need to
be earmarked outlays with lower requirement of share of the ULBs.
Capacity building within the ULBs is critical for successful implementation of the scheme.
Even ULBs not yet included in the Scheme must benefit from capacity building initiatives
as this has marginal additional costs with benefits of a very significant order.
A Critical and Urgent Area ofR eform -Regulating the Real Estate Sector
There is one critical and urgent area of reform without attention to which all others will not
achieve the objectives. This relates to the regulation of real estate sector by an independent
regulatory authority. Existing laws on land registry, transfer of property, contracts and related
matters are themselves inadequate, are implemented by different authorities and they cast
no responsibility (or liability) on the builder/developer for observing certain core norms
in the contracts with home-buyers. Builders/Developers investing above a certain sum in
real estate, in notified urban and urbanising areas, should be required to register and bind
themselves to specified core norms of contract and for compliance with all relevant laws
and regulations applicable to land and construction in such areas. There should be civil
and criminal liability for breach and the regulatory body should also have power to impose
fines, de register and/or black list offenders and publish the names.
Mega Cities - Metropolitan Corporations
Re-Forming Mega Cities
For India, it would be useful to define all cities with a recognised metropolitan area and a
population of five million as a megacity and plan for its future with a long term perspective
of at least 30 years.
Redevelopment of the Existing Cities: For land developers, the cost of redeveloping inner
city properties - brownfield redevelopment - is much higher than green freed developments.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
At the same time, for the city, 'brownfields redevelopment' is a fiscally-sound way to bring
investment back to neglected neighborhoods, cleanup the environment, reuse existing
infrastructure that is already paid for, utilise existing markets and labour pools, and relieve
development pressure on our urban fringes and farmlands. Consequently, there must
be incentives to encourage better development in the cities, rather than in the distant
suburbs.
Developing 25-30 World Class Mega Cities in India
India has to focus on developing at least 25-30 world class mega cities across the country
in the next decade in order to give a boost to planned urbanisation in the country. The
Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission QNNURM) has in a sense, made a
beginning in this direction by taking up urban renewal projects in mission mode in 63
selected cities.
However, any such programme also has to be backed by a zero tolerance regulatory regime,
one that enforces all civic laws, major and minor, in an impartial and unforgiving manner
so that the present climate of impunity that prevails in our big cities can be brought to an
end.
A zero tolerance strategy towards violations of civic laws will help to forestall the kind of
widespread and blatant violations of building bye laws and land use norms that led to the
Delhi demolitions. For this to happen, in addition to the decentralisation oriented reforms
that form the conditionalities for fund flows under the JNNURM, there is need to focus
on encouraging and inducing cities to mount a massive crackdown on civic violations of all
kinds so that infrastructure development under schemes such as the JNNURM is combined
with genuine civic regeneration in our mega cities.
Authorities for Metropolitan Corporations
All cities with population above one million should have Metropolitan Police Authorities.
This Authority should have powers to plan and oversee community policing, improving
police-citizen interface, suggesting ways to improve quality of policing, approve annual
police plans and review the working of such plans.
Metropolitan Transportation Authority: Unified Metropolitan Transport Authorities must
be set up in the six largest cities within the next year on priority.
Metropolitan Planning Commerce: The Commission is of the view that for the megacities,
it would be useful to have the Chief Minister as the Chairperson of the MPC.This would

Local Governance - An Inspiring Journey into the Future
give the requisite impetus and priority to the process of formulating and implementing
the city development plans and will also obviate the need for the CDP/Master Plans to be
submitted to the State Government for approval.
Metropolitan Environmental Authority: An environment authority may be set up in each
city with a population above five million in the first instance, for urban environment
management, with powers as appropriate to be delegated by the State Government. Certain
activities can be delegated over time to smaller bodies also. Basically, while the laying down
of the regulations and the overall inspection powers would remain with the Pollution
Control Board or any other appropriate body, the actual effort on the ground must, as far
as is feasible, be undertaken by the Municipality/Corporation itself.
Urban Poverty
Beneficiary Identification
The 'Report of the Eleventh Five Year Plan (2007-12) Working Group on Urban Housing
with Focus on Slums' (Union Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation) lays
stress on the need for an exhaustive survey to identify the poor. It has been pointed out
that such a survey should be city specific correlating with the specific conditions of the
urban poor in that area and the parameters should be such that are easily comprehensible
to the general public and should be made public before conducting the survey. This Report
also suggests that after identification, the beneficiaries may be issued multi-utility cards.
The Commission feels that the parameters for identifying the beneficiaries should be such
which could be ascertained in an objective and simple manner during a survey without
any discretionary element. The basic parameters should be spelt out at the national level.
The identification should be based on a door-to-door survey and the survey teams should
include at least one person from the concerned Area Sabha.
Measures for Poverty Alleviation
Once the poor have been identified, the issue of urban poverty alleviation would have
to be addressed in a systematic and time-bound manner by adopting the mission mode
approach. The main thrust area should be on providing skill upgradation and training to
the poor. The urban local bodies should also have their own poverty alleviation schemes
with adequate backward and forward linkages and convergence. The schemes should have
adequate flexibility with regard to type of projects and amount of finance keeping in mind
the forces of demand and supply. For training the urban poor, self-employment training
institutes on the lines of RUDSETI's may be replicated in urban areas.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Literacy
Providing education in poor urban areas cannot be viewed in isolation and there has to be
convergence between socio-economic development and education. This convergence can be
brought by the local bodies. The municipal bodies should ensure that the basic amenities
are provided to such areas immediately and also ensure that adequate space is provided for
setting up of schools. The education plan should form an integral part of the development
plan for the city.
Health and Nutrition
For improving the lot of the urban poor, urban local bodies should adopt the concept of
providing Primary Health Care Centres as is being done in the rural areas. These should
preferably cater to slum areas where the urban poor are concentrated and should include
community based auxiliary health staff to focus on reduction of IMR and MMR.
Slums in Urban Areas
The total allocation for housing for the urban poor has been grossly insufficient and must
be increased substantially. It would be essential to improve the entire area covered by a slum
rather than spend on individual hutments. If it is accepted that there is no ownership of
property individually in a slum, then it gives scope for the authorities to easily prepare an
integrated, socially inclusive colony covering the entire area.
The Commission has given due consideration to this complex issue and recommends that
the following suggestions could be kept in view while preparing slum development policies
or specific schemes:
a. All projects for slum redevelopment must be finalised only after sufficient
disclosure and discussion with the slum dwellers and their representatives. The
felt needs of the beneficiaries must be noted and no top down enforcement
approach should be adopted.
b. The maximum possible floor area may be provided to the beneficiaries. The
present limit of four floors on slum/poor housing reconstruction also needs
to be reviewed.
c. Only a small percentage of the land may be offered for profit based development
.. and all needs of public spaces must be built into the scheme. The facilities
I'm

Local Governance - An Inspiring Journey into the Future
to be provided should include total sanitation, adequate water supply, and
depending on factors such as space, location, population and proximity to
existing facilities; schools, creches, libraries, dispensaries, cultural activities
cent~es, transport shelters and relevant civic offices.
d. A small percentage of the cost of the dwelling unit can be met by the
beneficiary.
Land Use Reservation for the Urban Poor
It has to be expected that further migration and population increase could create more
slums. To avoid this, and to improve the housing stock for the poor, it is necessary to
earmark and reserve a certain percentage of land in each town and city for the urban poor.
This must be a part of the spatial planning process and must apply to all private developers
as well. If a particular construction cannot allocate housing for the poor, the developer
must, at his own cost, provide suitable housing in any other appropriate place acceptable
to the authorities.
Shelter for Pavement Dwellers: Parallel to housing for slum dwellers, a part of all programmes
must include housing for pavement dwellers. An immediate requirement would be
construction of night shelters, which could be built by the State Governments and the civic
bodies, and handed over to NGOs to run. A detailed programme needs to be drawn up
in all cities, beginning with large cities having Metropolitan. and Municipal Corporations
for implementation.
Urban Planning
The Town and Country Planning Act(s)
It needs to be emphasized that urban planning can be conceptualised at three levels, at the
level of a broad perspective plan for a large urban or urbanising area (usually called the
master plan), at the level of zonal plans within that area (where the actual detailing of land
use patterns is done) and the layout level (where the focus is on neighborhoods and the
linkages with infrastructure service networks become explicit.) In the context of the 74th
Amendment, the inference thus is that the DPCs and the MPCs have to do the function of
preparing plans for the regional levels (master plan and zonal plans) while the layout plans
have to be prepared by the local bodies (Panchayats and Municipalities/Corporations). The
Commission has already made it clear that DPCs and MPCs should be the sole planning
authorities for urban areas (and for bridging the rural-urban divide) in the country.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
The Commission wishes to reiterate the imperative need to mainstream disaster specific
concerns in the process of urban planning. Special attention is invited to the recommend~tion
about making the National Building Code (NBC) available free of cost and to prepare
pamphlets and handbooks on local building bye-laws etc. Making municipal building bye
laws, NBC compliant is an urgent need.
Mere drawing up of good spatial plans is not sufficient. Violations of the zoning regulations
are common in our cities. The Commission is of the view that once the City Development
Plan (CDP) is finalised, no authority should have any discretion to grant any exemption
or waiver. The CDP should have a thirty-year perspective to be revised after every ten years
through a participative and transparent process.
With land prices in cities soaring, the tendency to encroach on public lands is very common.
Such lands include water bodies, natural drains etc. Such encroachments also threaten the
ecology of the region and aggravate the problems during any crisis or disasters. The municipal
authorities should underake a special drive to clear such encroachments. Responsibility
should be fixed on officials in whose jurisdiction such encroachments take place.
Peri-urban Areas
Wherever townships including satellite towns have been set up by the development
authorities, a clear cut time table for transfer of jurisdiction of these planned colonies from
the development authorities to the concerned municipal bodies has to be ensured.
Private Townships
The new private housing colonies are not really in the direction of "private cities". They are
much smaller and are only private or gated colonies. Apart from bulk receipt of services and
utilities, they have no other contact with the local civic authorities. All internal maintenance
is done by the developer. It is necessary that the establishment of these colonies must be
allowed only within the broad parameters of the larger regional urban planning process
where the development plans must clearly indicate spaces for private expansion and
integrated into the availability of water, sewerage etc. A part of the land must be earmarked
for housing the poor who, in any case, would provide various services to the "township".
With underground water becoming a fast depleting public resource, such townships which
cater to the urban rich, need to be allowed with caution. Most importantly, the gated
townships must be placed squarely under the jurisdiction of the concerned local body and
be subordinate to their rules and laws.
I _"

Local Governance - An Inspiring Journey into the Future
Special Economic Zones (SEZs)
Local bodies should have full jurisdiction with regards to enforcement of local civic laws
in the SEZs. A degree of autonomy for the SEZs to enable them to provide infrastructure
and civic services in their areas would be desirable. Taxes raised by the local bodies from the
SEZ area can be shared with the SEZ Management in lieu of civic amenities provided by
them. By such an arrangement, the autonomy of SEZ is protected, the local government's
authority is preserved without a drain on the revenues, and resources are mobilised to
supplement local government revenues for building additional infrastructure required.
Urban Local Bodies and the State Government
The Commission is of the view that since local bodies (both urban and rural) constitute the
third tier of governance, they must have full autonomy in the areas assigned to them. At
the same time, it should also be the responsibility of the State Government to ensure that
the local governments carry out their activities in accordance with law. But this should not
translate into State Government exercising day-to-day control over the functioning oflocal
governments. The powers of the State Government should be confined to a few items like
suspension or cancellation of any resolution and dissolution or supercession, of the local
body under special circumstances. But even such powers should be used sparingly and only
after a report from the local body Ombudsman. In case of resolutions passed by the ULBs
which are considered by the respective State Government to be beyond their purview or
where the State Government is of the opinion that on grounds of absolute breakdown of
the administrative machinery or financial bankruptcy or entrenched corruption etc. the
ULB(s) needs to be dissolved or superseded, it should place the records before the local
body Ombudsman concerned for investigation and appropriate recommendation.

CAPACITY BUILDING FOR CONFLICT RESOLUTION
- Friction to Fusion
Introduction
In the last few decades, conflicts have arisen in our country from multiple causes such as
caste and tribal issues, religion, regional disparities, poverty, land and water, just to name a
few. There has been considerable research on why conflicts occur and how to resolve them.
Such research, however, p~ovides only a general treatment of the subject and the root remains
mite ridden. Conscious of this, the Commission has undertaken a comprehensive study
of the problem of conflict resolution including organising workshops for consultations on
specific conflicts in India and through discussions with a large number of individuals from
different walks of life, who have had experience in dealing with conflicts.
CONFLICT RESOLUTION - A CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK
Conflict Resolution - Perspectives
Conflict has been defined as a situation between two or more parties who see their
perspectives as incompatible. Conflicts have a negative beneficial connotation, but some
conflicts are desirable as they can create change.
The founding fathers of the Constitution were fully aware that a democratic polity with
an inegalitarian economic structure could be a source of intense conflicts. That is why the
Constitution contained a number of provisions entrusting the State with the responsibility
of reducing and eliminating inequalities. By empowering the State to intervene in the
economy to promote the interests of the economically disadvantaged, the Constitution
sought to ensure that the democratic polity is not used as a vehicle for the perpetration,
perpetuation or aggravation of economic inequalities.
The framers of the Constitution were also aware that steps taken to change the status quo
would themselves create conflicts, especially in the context of transition of a traditional,
unequal society into a modern democratic one. The change in status quo mandated by the
various Rights conferred by the Constitution under the Right to Equality are examples of

Capacity Building for Conflict Resolution - Friction to Fusion
this. Provisions for reservations for various underprivileged communities also fall in the same
category. It is the State's duty to scrupulously guard the core principles of the Constitution
and contain any conflicts arising while implementing its mandate.
It is important to develop an understanding of the genesis of conflicts and to formulate
long-term strategies that not only address immediate demands but also include attention
to underlying issues such as alleviation of poverty, social justice and empowerment, and
corruption-free development at the grass-root level. The State cannot allow itself the
indulgence of treating conflicts as mere breakdown oflaw and order and adopt fire-fighting
techniques to address such breakdowns. When the fault lines lie along identities of tribe,
caste, region and religion, the State needs to create political conditions and institutions for
mediating the conflicts of these diverse groups and integrating them so that the groups can
function collectively and harmoniously. The surest way is to restore confidence through a
process of multi-stakeholder dialogue. The approach ought to start from the simple principle
that conflicts can be resolved peacefully - and on an enduring basis - only through trust
and persistent and inclusive dialogue. The need is to build multi-stakeholder platforms or
similar participatory processes that bring stakeholders together. There is need for inclusive
frameworks - both institutional and administrative - within which people with divergent
interests and aspirations can discuss and agree to cooperate and coordinate their actions.
There is also need to recognize that political, social and economic rivalry is an unavoidable
part of the development process - who gets what, when and how. Whether these rivalries
deepen into conflicts that prove intractable over time depends on the capacity of the
institutions of the State to articulate and understand the interests and aspirations of different
groups, to arbitrate between them and to mediate rivalries. All of this depends on having
institutions at all levels that are seen as legitimate, effective, participatory, credible and
accountable, and not as tokens or as mechanisms that promote and buttress narrow vested
interests. The task, then, is one of building appropriate capacity and effectiveness in these
institutions.
LEFT EXTREMISM
7he 'Nature' oft he Movement
Barring a phase in the late 1960s and early 1970s' the left extremist movement has been
largely agrarian in the sense that it seeks to mobilize discontent and misgovernance in the
rural areas to achieve its objectives.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Causes for Spread ofL eft Extremism
While the goal of the left extremists was to actualise their own vision of the State through
'revolution', they chose to usher that revolution by enlisting the support of the deprived and
exploited sections of society. The Commission would like to refer to the causes exhaustively
identified by the "Expert Group on Development and the Causes of Discontent, Unrest
and Extremism" of the Planning Commission in its draft report. These are broadly, land
related factors, displacement and forced evictions, likelihood related causes, social exclusion
and poor governance.
It may be highlighted again that these causes are most glaring in forest areas predominantly
inhabited by tribal populations who thus become the main instruments and victims of left
extremist violence.
The diagnoses of the problem by the government and the left extremists are similar. Both
'sides' agree that concealed tenancy, tenurial insecurity, low wage rates and lingering feudal
practices in many places have generated a discontent among the rural poor. Despite a variety
of legislations enacted to address a whole host of land related issues, their impact at the
ground level is marginal due to tardy implementation.
Historically, tribal life was well integrated with the forest, but legislations and governance
in the last century considerably altered this symbiosis. The Forest Act, 1927 and the Forest
Conservation Act, 1980 along with stringent Supreme Court orders have turned forests into
prohibited areas for the tribals, creating serious imbalances in their lives and livelihoods. This
has turned the tribals against government's methods of forest management, and gradually
against government itself.
Resolution ofL eft Extremist Conflicts - Successes and Failures
A judicious mix of development and welfare initiatives coupled with land reforms and well
planned counter-insurgency operations is required to restore peace, harmony and confidence
in the administration in such areas. A '14-point policy' to deal with this problem was
presented in Parliament by the Union Home Minister on 13th March, 2006. This policy
outlines measures to be taken to deal with this issue at the political, social, developmental
and administrative levels.
The Commission notes with satisfaction that a general consensus has now emerged on
not treating violent left extremism only as a law and order problem but as a multi causal
malaise with breakdown of law and order as its 'ranking symptom'.

Capacity Building for Conflict Resolution - Friction to Fusion
Managing Left Extremism - the Political Paradigm
The '14-point policy' rightly underscores the need to contextualize left extremism in a
perspective that is wider than the conventional wisdom of a mixture of the 'police stick'
and the 'development carrot'. While the ultimate goal of the left extret:nist movement is
to capture state power, its immediate manifestation is in the form of a struggle for social
justice, equality, dignity and honesty in public services. It should be possible to visualize
this movement not as a threat to the security of the State but a fight within the State for
obtaining what the system promised but failed to deliver. In that context, there may also be
a need to keep the door open for negotiations with such groups and not necessarily insist
on preconditions such as laying down of arms. The temptation to utilise the police forces
is very high but it should be remembered that unaccountable police action and abuse of
police power validates violence even among the hitherto non-involved populations.
Building Capacity ofS ecurity Forces (including the Police)
The Commission would"like to draw attention to the following:
• 'Dialogue' and 'accommodation' find easier acceptance when the good intentions
of the State and its will to restore order are concurrently visible.
• Even in the most difficult and trying situations, the operation of security forces
must be strictly within the framework of the law. To enhance the capacity of the
security forces to act effectively and firmly within constitutional bounds, it is
necessary that standard operational procedures and protocols are laid down.
• Training and reorientation including sensitising police and paramilitary personnel
to the root causes of the disturbances that they are seeking to curb are necessary
req uirement s.
• Formation of specially trained special task forces on the pattern of the Greyhounds
in Andhra Pradesh can also form an important element of the strategy.
• In areas affected by left extremism generally the representation from the groups
involved - mainly the tribals - is inadequate. Scrupulously enforcing the
prescribed reservations from the relevant areas, etc. are measures requiring urgent
attention.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Building Capacity ofA dministrative Institutions
Filling the administrative vacuum in the regions of the country affected by left extremism
is of paramount importance.
The Scheduled Tribes and other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights)
Act, 2006 is a welcome measure. It is necessary that an Oversight Committee is constituted
to monitor its implementation.
Norms of development schemes, pose difficulties in tribal hamlets in view of their scattered
nature and often minuscule population. There is a case for providing much greater flexibility
in the implementation of centrally sponsored and other development schemes in such areas
for which decentralisation would appear to be the answer.
Similar flexibility has to be introduced in the administrative and judicial set up so that
dispute settlement at the local level is both timely and effective.
Capacity Building among Government Personnel
There is a strong case for 'back to the basics' in the matter of administrative monitoring
and supervision. The system of periodic official inspections and review of organisational
performance needs to be revitalized.
Capacity Building in Local Bodies
In an atmosphere of distrust of the petty bureaucracy and apparent inefficiency of the
administrative apparatus in delivering services, one obvious solution is to strengthen local
self-governing institutions to facilitate settlement of local problems. Enactment of the
provisions of the Panchayats (Extension to the Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996 commonly
known as PESA, is thus a welcome initiative. While many States have taken preliminary
action on the lines suggested in PESA, there is a general impression that its implementation
is, by and large, unsatisfactory. The Commission hopes that apart from taking the requisite
legislative action, State Governments would also put in place mechanisms to monitor that
the objectives set out therein are being met. It may be useful to link performance in this
regard with allocation of untied grants for area development.
Cutting the Source ofF inances for Naxalites
Like any other extremist movement the Naxalite movement also mobilises funds which
sustain them. Such mobilisation is in the form of extortion from local people and also

Capacity Building for Conflict Resolution
from contractors executing various projects in the affected areas. Besides, funds are also
raised through forest and mine operations. One way to ensure that development funds
do not reach the extremists is by entrusting these works temporarily to organisations like
the Border Roads Organisation and other governmental agencies which can execute these
works directly. This is recommended as a purely temporary measure and not to stifle local
private entrepreneurship.
LAND RELATED ISSUES
It is clear that the difficulties of the agrarian community have the potential of engendering
serious conflicts. The Expert Group on Agricultural Indebtedness appointed by the Ministry
of Finance went into the causes of farmers' distress and recommended.
• Expanding the agricultural base by giving more support to small and marginal
farmers primarily through 'Self Help Groups' (SHG~) and Cooperatives.
• Transferring informal debt to formal institutions.
• Rejuvenation of natural resource base particularly in rain fed areas.
• More effective risk coverage to protect the farmers from risks like price and demand
fluctuations, vagaries of weather and natural calamities.
• Increased public investment not only in agriculture but for diversification of
the non-farm sector within the rural areas to generate alternative livelihoods for
farmers.
• Poverty alleviation programmes to more specifically cater to the needs of
poorer farmers with farmers' organisations being involved in the design of such
programmes.
The Commission, while endorsing the above recommendations, also shares the view of
the Group that tenurial reforms, including empowerment of the tenants on the lines of
'Operation Barga' ofW est Bengal are still highly relevant for empowerment of poor farmers.
For similar reasons, consolidation of land holdings should be carried forward to the next
stage. Pursuing agricultural growth through a slew of measures including empowerment of
small and marginal farmers and continuing land reforms measures, apart from achieving
the macro and micro economic objectives, would also go a long way in preventing major
rural unrest.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
New National Rehabilitation and Resettlement (R&R) Policy
Government of India, in October, 2007, approved a new national policy on Rehabilitation
and Resettlement. The new Policy and the associated legislative measures aim at striking a
balance between the need for land for developmental activities and, protecting the interests
of the land owners, and others, such as the tenants, the landless, the agricultural and non
agricultural labourers, artisans, etc whose livelihood depends on the land involved.
There is need to introduce the concept of benefit-sharing in development-induced
displacement in India. While it is true that comprehensive amendments made in 1984 to
the Land Acquisition Act have improved matters to some extent, the Act is still based on the
concept of cash compensation. The old concept of paying compensation based on the market
value ofland should be replaced with assessing the true value ofland for all those who depend
on it and then compensating them adequately. Under the circumstances, there is need for
enacting a new legislation that apart from laying down norms of fair compensation also
incorporates the principles of income-sharing and creation of a resettlement development
fund in addition to compensation payment. Also the compensation/rehabilitation should
not be confined only to the title holders of land but should include all those who derived
sustenance from the land.
Administrative Arrangements for Conflict Resolution for SEZs
The source of conflict in respect of the SEZ policy in India arises from displacement,
loss of agricultural land and the potential for real estate speculation. The Group of
Ministers constituted by the Government of India to look into the SEZ policy has already
recommended that State Governments should not normally acquire the bulk of the lands
for the SEZs. This is a good decision because establishing SEZs to allocate land to private
companies cannot be termed as furtherance of a public purpose. The Commission also
feels that a better approach would be to have a limited number of large SEZs preferably
in backward areas so that they lead to infrastructure creation. In addition, it would be
desirable that the proportion of land allowed to be used for 'non-processing' activities
should be minimised.
The livelihood of those ousted should, however, be the prime concern in conflict resolution.
While the Group of Ministers has suggested that the rehabilitation package should include
a job for at least one person from the affected family, such a stipulation is not adequate.
Rehabilitation packages should be based on an income-sharing strategy. The idea, on the
whole, should be to make the oustees primary stakeholder partners rather than one-time
beneficiaries or spectators of SEZ development.

Capacity Building for Conflict Resolution - Friction to Fusion
\ '
The SEZ law should also specify establishment of vocational training centers. Provision of
water, sanitation and health facilities should precede the actual developmental activities in
the vicinity of the villages. There should be a clear provision in the SEZ law allocating such
responsibility to the entrepreneurs seeking to establish the SEZs.
In order to prevent conflict situations from arising and leading to violence, it is necessary
that industrial activities and SEZs are located in areas where they cause the least displacement
and dislocation, and do not usurp productive agricultural lands. For the purpose, it may be
desirable to prepare comprehensive land use plans which could indicate where industrial
activities and SEZs could be located. It is necessary, however, to ensure that such land use
plans are finalized only after public consultations and inviting and taking into account
objections to the proposed land use planning. Once the land use plans are finalised, they
should be faithfully followed and should in effect be for a specified number of years.
WATER RELATED ISSUES
The most significant lesson from the past is that the Union Government has not been able
to act decisively and has generally taken a 'minimalist' attitude. The other lesson is that the
time lost in delays due to wrangling both before and during Tribunal proceedings is very
costly. Increasingly, States are becoming resistant to compliance with Awards of tribunals
in spite of express provisions in the Constitution regarding the finality of such Awards.
Courts are barred from reviewing the Awards of the tribunals, but matters are still taken to
the Supreme Court on related issues.
The Commission would therefore suggest that the Union Government should be made a
party to proceedings before the Tribunals and there should be an enforcement mechanism
to implement the awards given by the Tribunals. Article 262 (1) already bars the jurisdiction
of the Supreme Court but matters are still being taken there on related legal, jurisdictional,
environmental and constitutional issues. Since Article 262 is the only Article in the
Constitution that bars the jurisdiction of the Courts, it would be necessary for Courts to
take note of this constitutional provision.
The Commission fully endorses the suggestion of the National Commission for integrated
Water Resources Development for establishment of RBOs. River-basin planning and
implementation is the ideal system to follow. The Commission would like to recommend
the enactment of a legislation in place of the River Boards Act, 1956 that could provide, in
addition to the establishment of River Basin Organisations for each inter-State river goals,
responsibilities and management for the RBOs.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
National Ulater Resources Council
The National Water Resources Council was set up by the Government of India in March
1983.
The Prime Minister is the Chairman, the Union Minister of Water Resources is the
Vice-Chairman and the Minister of State for Water Resources, concerned Union
Ministers/ Ministers of State, Chief Ministers of all States and Lieutenant Governors/
Administrators
ofUrtion Territories are the members of the Council. Although the Council is supposed to
meet once a year, this does not often happen. As far as coordination of river basin planning
and management and effective water use are concerned, the Council has not had much
impact.
Since it is such a high-powered body, the Council should playa much more positive role.
The Chairman of all the River Basin Organisations, as and when formed, may be made
members of the Council.
Need for a National Law on Ulater
While India has 16 per cent of the world's population, its share in the world's fresh water
availability isonJy 4 per cent. Per capita availability ~n India was 5200 m3 in 1951 but
it had fallen to 2200m3 in 1991 and further to 1820 m3 in 2001. It is expected to fall
further to 1340m3 in 2025 and 1140m3 in 2050. Water-stress conditions already exist in
many parts. Under the circumstances, there is need for much greater efficiency in the use
of water and a greater public awareness on the criticality of water conservation. This would
call for efforts to develop, conserve, utilise and manage water on the basis of a framework
that incorporates national perspectives.
A national water poli0' was formulated by the Ministry ofW ater Resources, Government of
India in September 1987, but it is yet to be operationalised because of lack of guidelines. A
better way to articulate and operationalise a national perspective on water will be through
the instrumentality of a law. The Commission would therefore like to recommend that
a national water law that keeps in view the interests and needs of the States should be
enacted.

Capacity Building for Conflict Resolution - Friction to Fusion
ISSUES RELATED TO SCHEDULED CASTES
Introduction
Members of the Scheduled Castes are among the poorest in the country and also, the
most discriminated against. This discrimination often manifests itself in the form of socio
economic exploitation, denial of civil rights,· social ostracism and even violence against
them which sometimes assumes brutal proportions in the form of massacres, rape, burning
of colonies etc.
Evaluation oft he legislative framework
The number of cases registered under the Protection of Civil Rights Act, 1955 has shown
a constant decline after the 1970s. These figures could, however, lead to the erroneous
conclusion that the problem of untouchability is also on the decline. In fact, the National
Commission for Scheduled Castes, in its Sixth Report has observed "rather, it is a reRection
on the ineffectiveness of the law enforcement machinery". From the figures indicated above,
it is also evident that the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities)
Act has become the main instrument for preventing harassment to the Scheduled Castes.
The conviction rate under both the Acts has been low.
The Administration should be much more proactive in dealing with cases of exploitation of
the Scheduled Castes. It has to be ensured that all registered crimes against SCs are taken
expeditiously to their logical conclusion. The District monitoring mechanism has a very
important role to play in this. The approach of the Administration should be to detect cases
of violation of law, suo-motu rather than wait for an FIR to be filed.
Though the Act provides for setting up of Special Courts for trying offences, the Supreme
Court has held that such courts can take cognizance of a case only after it has been
committed to it by the jurisdictional Magistrate. The National Commission for Scheduled
Castes has recommended an amendment to the Act to remove this extra step. Special
Courts should be empowered to take cognizance of offences under the Act, directly.
Institutional Framework
Administrative Action Required
Considering the magnitude of the atrocities and discrimination practices, the Commission
is of the view that a multi-pronged strategy should be evolved that needs to include the
following:

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
• Effective implementation of various laws enacted for the purpose;
• Motivating the field functionaries;
• Monitoring and review by District Level Monitoring Committees;
• Police reforms;
• Engaging independent agencies to conduct field surveys to identify cases of social
discrimination;
• Coordination mechanism for the various National and State level
Commissions;
• Involving Panchayati Raj Institutions; and
• Effective implementation of land reforms and other social legislation;
Capacity Building
A Centrally Sponsored Scheme is in operation to ensure implementation of civil rights
measures. The bulk of the expenditure under this Scheme is incurred on staff and related
establishment expenditure. Since discrimination is still practised, atrocities committed and
civil rights violated, it will be necessary to appropriate part of the funds under the Centrally
Sponsored Schemes for awareness building activities particularly in remote rural areas where
awareness levels are low and victims do not come forward to lodge complaints. Further,
funds from the Scheme should be utilised for training staff in the enforcement agencies so
that they are suitably sensitised to the problems of the Scheduled Castes and their duty &
responsibility in ensuring that no discrimination goes undetected and unpunished.
Convergence ofR egulatory and Development Programmes
Effective implementation of existing legislations for protecting members of the Scheduled
Castes from atrocities is not enough unless they are accompanied by effective and time
bound implementation of developmental schemes. It is recommended that a decadal
perspective plan should be drawn up for implementation of development schemes for the
Scheduled Castes.
Involvement of Civil Society Organisations (CSOs)
Many Civil Society Organisations are implementing projects for the benefit of the Scheduled
Castes including with financial assistance and grants-in-aid from the government. It is

Capacity Building for Conflict Resolution - Friction to Fusion
equally important that these CSOs should be encouraged and incentivised to work in
inaccessible and remote areas where development projects are required and the presence of
CSOs are still minimal. The CSOs should also be encouraged to help the Scheduled Castes
to raise their voice against atrocities discrimination and exploitation fearlessly and with the
confidence that action as per law would be promptly taken on their complaints.
Expeditious Trial of Criminal Cases
It may be necessary to institutionalise an internal watch-dog mechanism under the control
of an Administrative Judge of the respective High Court. At the end of each month, a review
of such cases pending trial in the appropriate courts may have to be carried out.
ISSUES RELATED TO SCHEDULED TRIBES
The Human Development Indices (HDIs) of the ST population are much lower than the
rest of the population in terms of all parameters such as education, health, income, etc.
Further, the gap in the infrastructure in the tribal areas vis-a-vis the rest of the areas is
widening at a much faster rate. The position of the tribals lies at the very periphery of the
social formation. Social inequalities of the tribal population are manifested in various forms
of exploitation such as bondage, forced labour and indebtedness. They are also exploited
by merchants, money lenders and forest contractors.
Social Justice
In terms of the implementation oflaws and capacity building, recommendations made by the
Commission in case of the Scheduled Castes, hold good for the Scheduled Tribes also.
The Panchayats (Extension to the Scheduled Area) Act, 1996
The Panchayats (Extension to the Scheduled Area) Act, 1996 (PESA) is a landmark
legislation that ensures involvement of tribals in their empowerment process not only
as active participants but also as effective decision-makers, implementors, monitors and
evaluators. The Gram Sabha as articulated in PESA, has within itself an inbuilt capacity
for conflict resolution.
The tribal communities have a tradition of decision making that is often democratic. If the
tribal population is made aware of the provisions of PESA and the 73rd Amendment to
the Constitution, it would result in greater participatory democracy in the tribal areas. This
would call for organising awareness campaigns so that the tribals would be in a position to.
demand accountability of the elected representatives and government functionaries.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
A comparative analysis of PESA and the legislations enacted by the States on this subject
reveals that the provisions of PESA have been highly diluted in the process of ratification
by the States. Critical issues such as access to natural resources, especially the definition
and rights over minor forest products remain unresolved and, in general, the objectives of
PESA have not been realized in any serious manner in any of the states with a large tribal
population.
A duty is cast upon the Union Government to see that its provisions are strictly implemented.
If any State does not implement the provisions of PES A in letter and spirit, the Government
of India should issue specific directions in accordance with its power to issue directions under
proviso 3 of part A of the Fifth Schedule. One of the ways in which implementation of
PESA provisions can be ensured is to establish a forum at the Central level so that violation
of the provisions of the enactment could be brought before this forum and the deviations
highlighted and necessary correctives applied. The Fifth Schedule of the Constitution
requires the Governor of every State to send an annual report, but this requirement is not
being met regularly. The practice of regular annual reports from Governors should be given
due importance. Such reports should be published and placed in the public domain.
Displacement ofTribals
PESA had specifically provided for prevention of alienation of land. It had empowered
every Gram Sabha to prevent alienation of land in the Scheduled Areas Paradoxically,
however, PESA has been unscrupulously and indiscriminately used to promote industrial
development at the expense of tribals.
The dismal state of land records maintained by the local administration is another source
of frustration and conflict. The non-availability of land records, and in many instances, the
ma~ed reluctance of the administration to provide information on the actual ownership
of land has made it increasingly difficult for tribals to contest acquisition of land by the
state to prove their ownership. A complete overhaul and systematic organisation of existing
land records with freer access to such information would have a positive effect and avoid
conflict situations.
Lack ofH armony in Implementation ofL aws and Policies
The basic system of laws governing Tribal Rights is still extremely unclear. It is therefore
imperative to create a task force that should undertake a "Harmonisation of Laws" - (a)
between Central Acts and Local Land Laws, (b) between Forest and Revenue ~ords
and (c) between Court judgments and other laws. No integrative exercise has so far been

Capacity Building for Conflict Resolution - Fri~tion to Fusion
undertaken these Fifth Schedule Areas and to harmonise them with the aims and objectives
of PESA. Such an exercise is overdue. Among the laws which warrant particular attention
are the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation)
Act, 1957, the Indian Forest Act, 1927, the Forest Conservation Act, 1980 and the Indian
Registration Act. The National Minerals Policy, 2003, National Forest Policy, 1988, Wild
Life Conservation Strategy, 2002 and National Draft Environment Policy, 2004 would, in
particular, require detailed examination from the view point of ensuring compliance with
the provisions of PESA.
Capacity Building in Administration
It is necessary that Government posts only such police, revenue, forest and development
officials who have the required training and commitment to work in such areas and
empathise with the tribal population. Officials also need to be motivated to work in such
areas. One way of doing this would be to select officials for specific posts in tribal areas
providing hardship pay, preferential treatment in accommodation and education etc all of
which would induce officials to volunteer for such posting.
Convergence ofR egulatory and Development Programmes
As in the case of Scheduled Castes, steps for social justice for the STs through effective
implementation of the existing legislations and other regulatory measures would succeed in
resolving conflicts only if they are accompanied by effective and time-bound implementation
of developmental schemes for the STs. For the purpose, a decadal developmental plan may
be prepared and implemented in a mission mode.
Tribal Policy
There is no clear national tribal policy laying down the direction and imperatives for tribal
development. It is time that a national plan of action for tribe-specific comprehensive
development which could serve as a road map for the welfare of the tribals is formulated.
Conflicts Related to Inclusion in the List ofS cheduled Tribes
There have been agitations-sometimes violent - by certain groups, while laying their claims
for inclusion in the list of Scheduled Tribes.
There has to be a mechanism to bring together all authorities which in consultation with
the major States with tribal population, should attempt to arrive at a comprehensive
methodology with clearly defined parameters. It is well understood that ·inclusion of any

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
tribe in the list would generally lead to further demands and conflicts. The purpose of
adopting a consultative mechanism and evolving a comprehensive methodology is to reduce
the scope for conflict and arrive at decisions within a reasonable time frame.
ISSUES RELATED TO OTHER BACKWARD CLASSES
Introduction
There has been a great deal of resentment among people belonging to Other Backward Classes
(OBCs) including minorities that they have not been given the benefit of comprehensive
amelioration packages as has been done in the case of SCs and STs. This has often to led
to conflicts culminating in violence.
Social Empowerment
Special schemes on the lines of the schemes for SCs and STs need to be taken up for social
empowerment of the OBCs.
Article 15 (4) of the Constitution empowers the State to make special provisions for the
advancement of socially and educationally backward classes of citizens. In Article 46, an
obligation has been.c ast upon the State to promote with special care the educational and
economic interests of the weaker sections of the people. So the State will be fulfilling its
constitutional obligations in formulating and implementing a comprehensive scheme
towards capacity building of the OBCs including minorities that would improve their
socio-economic status and thus bring them at par with rest of society. This will also obviate
the conflicts of the OBCs vis-a-vis the 'Others'.
RELIGIOUS CONFLICTS
Introduction
The preamble to our Constitution clearly declares the intention to secure to all citizens
'liberty of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship'. Article 25 guarantees freedom
of conscience and the right to freely profess, practice and propagate religion. Article 26
ensures the right to manage religious institutions and religious affairs.
After Independence, there have been instances of large-scale communal violence in the
country.
This Commission examined the reports of various Commissions which have inquired into
different communal riots.

Capacity Building for Conflict Resolution - Friction to Fusion
Community Policing
The confidence of different communities in the impartiality of the police and other
administrative machinery is a key·f actor. The participation of the police in a manner
responding to the needs of the community, and the community, in turn, participating in
its own policing and supporting the police is an ideal situation for handling communal
conflicts.
Community policing is thus a concept which visualises the police and the citizens working
together to provide security to the community. It is a proactive process in which the police
works with the community in resolving conflicts and in providing a sense of security to
all the citizens. The Commission reiterates that the principles laid down in its Report on
'Public Order' should be followed in community policing which would also bring societal
and communal resilience in the context of religious conflicts.
District Administration and Citizens' Peace Committees
9.3.1 Citizens' peace committees in the districts have been found useful in many areas.
The Commission is of the view that District Peace Committees should be made effective
instruments of addressing issues likely to cause communal disharmony. These committees
should be constituted by the District Magistrate in consultation with the Superintendent of
Police~ Representation from different communities should be such as to instill confidence
in citizens about the effectiveness of the committee. In Police Commissionerates, these
committees should be constituted by the Police Commissioner in consultation with the
Municipal Commissioner. Such committees should also identify issues of local relevance
which have a propensity to degenerate into conflagration and suggest measures to deal
with them.
On the lines of the District Peace Committees as suggested above, there is also need for
organising 'Mohalla Committees'.
The Communal Violence (Prevention, Control and Rehabilitation o/Victims) Bill 2005
With a view to further empower the Union and State Governments to take effective
measures to provide for a holistic approach to prevent and control communal violence,
including rehabilitating the victims of such violence, mandating for speedy investigation
and trial, and imposing enhanced punishment, the Government of India introduced a Bill
in Parliament in 2005.

Reports of ~~e.Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
A separate legislation for dealing with communal violence is, perhaps not required since there .
are adequate provisions in the present statutes to deal with all aspects of communal violence.
There are several provisions in the Indian Penal Code (IPC) which deal extensively with
offences relating to religious, racial, linguistic or regional groups, castes and community.
The Indian Penal Code is comparable to laws in other countries which are there to combat
offences referred to as hate crimes.
Though there are adequate provisions in the IPC/CrPC to deal with communal offences and
acts of a communal nature, some of the provisions have not been effectively used because as
per provisions of 190 CrPC cognizance cannot be taken by a court of law except with the
prior sanction of the Union or the State Government or of the District Magistrate. Such
sanctions are generally difficult to procure. The Commission had considered this issue in
its Report on 'Public Order' and had recommended that -
"No sanction of the Union Government or the State Government should be necessary
for prosecution under Section 153(A). Section 196 Cr PC should be amended
accordingly. "
In the light of these considerations, the Commiss-ion is of the view that a separate legislation
is not necessary to combat communal violence. It is better to strengthen the basic laws
themselves, where necessary.
There are some innovative provisions in the Communal Violence (Prevention, Control
and Rehabilitation ofV ictims) Bill, 2005 which would further strengthen the hands of the
Government in dealing with communal violence and negating the ills associated with such
violence in a social context and they could be incorporated in existing laws.
Another feature of the Bill is that it provides a detailed institutional structure for the purpose
of providing relief and rehabilitation to persons affected by communal disturbances.
For providing relief and rehabilitation to victims of communal violence, the structures
envisaged to be created under Disaster Management Act, 2005 could be used which are
sufficient to effectively deal with them.
POLITICS AND CONFLICTS
Introduction
Political parties are crucial elements in the democratic process and very important from the
perspective of conflict resolution. In a heterogeneous country like India, in which different

Capacity Build~ng for Conflict Resolution - friction to Fusion
sections of people have grievances that arise out of social, economic and political issues
that remain to be resolved, it is important tha~ Other make use of the democratic space for
the resolution of such grievances. In this poFtical parties have a crucial role to play. When
the political process is not in a position to articulate such legitimate demands, conflicts
emerge. Today it has become more difficult for democratic space to be used for resolving
conflicts. One reason is because of compulsive politics where each political grouping has
multiple identities and where conflicts impinge on regional issues almost all the political
parties with regional interest in these issues take a rigid stand because of which conflicts
ten d to get "fjr ozen" .
Because of the above situation, it is necessary in the interest of conflict resolution for
democratic restraint on the part of all political parties. An effective way of institutionalising
this could be by formulating an enforceable code of conduct for political parties which
would define the forms of dissent permissible.
The Code must be drawn up by the political parties themselves. It could then be considered
for incorporation into a law which would inter alia set out the forms of dissent permissible
in a democratic set-up. Enforcement of this code can be by the Election Commission of
India.
Identity Issues
In recent times, identity issues have had a significant influence on how conflicts arise and
escalate. Identity issues are those in which collective identities such as those based on
language, religion, sect, caste and tribe, assume preeminence.
Identity politics has induced fundamental changes in how political parties woo the
electorate. In the early days of Independence, political parties used to woo all sections
of society irrespective of caste, religion, community or class. Today, the survival of many
political parties depends on the maintenance of linkages with one and more segmented
groups. Political parties openly flaunt their narrow identities, these particularisms are now
seen as a part of the process of empowerment. A positive aspect of the stress on particular
social segments is that some of the groups or interests that were earlier marginalised have
been able to find more space for themselves within the political and social systems. They
have more bargaining power than they had in the past, and are now increasingly part of
the mainstream. But the negative aspect has been the growth of a group-based approach
in all matters.
While such a development can, in one sense, be viewed as an inevitable step in the inclusion
of marginalised groups in the country's democratic process, it can also lead to conflict

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
and endless strife. What is important, therefore, is to ensure that the process of identity
politics is played out in the political arena within the space provided by democracy and
does not develop into intractable conflicts tainted by violence and threat to public order
and unity.
Considering the magnitude and complexity of the problem and the compulsions and
proclivities of political parties to play the identity card, mere punitive action may not be
enough. It may be necessary to create an institutional framework that can keep a watch
on the political parties playing the identity card and creating conflict at the district and
sub-district levels. The services of such an institution can be utilised as a watchdog body at
the district and sub-district levels to monitor and prevent activities of political parties in
playing identity politics engender conflicts. The reports of this watchdog body would be
an important input for the Election Commission to take action under the law proposed
earlier.
REGIONAL DISPARITIES
Contours oft he Problem
Many regional conflicts are an outcome of disparities in the development of a particular
region compared to the remaining parts of the country or the State of which that particular
region is a part.
Governments have a crucial role to play in reducing regional disparities and promoting
balanced development in which all areas and regions are enabled to develop. As the country's
economy integrates with the global economy, the State has to play a stronger equity
promoting role in order to remove the increasing regional disparities.
The Administrative Approach
The first task is to fortify the backward areas adequately and target them with additional
resources and investments to help them overcome structural deficiencies that contribute to
their backwardness. The other approach is to improve the overall environment for economic
and social growth of less developed States and areas through a judicious combination
of major infrastructure interventions, institutional reforms and appropriate incentives
structures. However, not all imbalances are amenable to positive solutions and that under
certain circumstances palliative measures in the form of safety nets may also be necessary
for quite some time. •

Capacity Building for Conflict Resolution - Friction to Fusion
There is a very strong case for strengthening governance in backward areas. The Commission
recommends that efforts for redressing regional imbalances should be directed through
local government agencies such as the Zila Parishads and others and not through 'special
purpose vehicles' like Area Development Boards and Authorities.
The Commission would also like to recommend establishment of a system of rewarding
States (whether prosperous or backward) who have successfully achieved significant reduction
in intra-State regional imbalances.
Identification ofB ackward Areas
There is need to formulate standard criteria for identifying backward areas. It is necessary
that human development indicators such as literacy and infant mortality rates should be
included within the criteria. As poverty is the most direct indicator of development, it
should be factored in the criteria. Factors such as literacy rates, infant mortality rate and
other indicators of social and economic infrastructure should also be included.
As regards the geographical unit for defining backwardness, the Commission is of the view
that the Block should be the unit for identification. This is because districts encompass
fairly large areas and populations with diverse characteristics and at varying stages of
development.
After the State specific Block level indices are worked out, they need to be applied as
general guidelines for allocation of resources for all development initiatives and in particular
allocations from State and district level plan funds. Backward Blocks thus identified should
also receive recognition for the purpose of allocations under the appropriate centrally
sponsored schemes. The strategy of reducing and minimizing regional imbalances primarily
through targeting attention to Blocks identified as backward within the context of each
State needs to be formally accepted by the Planning Commission.
The Union Government has launched a programme - the Backward Regions Grant Fund
(BRGF) in January 2007. The Backward Regions Grant Fund is designed to redress regional
imbalances in development. It will provide financial resources for supplementing and
converging existing developmental inflows into identified districts.
Additional funds should be provided to enable building of State infrastructure in a
programme which could be a grant facility for providing viability gap funding that will
allow resources to be leveraged for core infrastructure projects at inter-district level in less
developed States and backward areas of developed States.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
The approach to all such funding should be outcome driven. Funding in such cases should
be provided as a mechanism to achieve desired outcomes, and not as an end in itself as
has been done in the past. The strategy should be to define acceptable minimum norms of
human and infrastructure development that every block in the country should attain, and
the policies, initiatives and manners of funding should be driven by the consideration of
bridging the gaps and achieve the standards so defined.
CONFLICTS IN THE NORTH EAST
Introduction
Typology of Conflicts
Conflic:,-s ~ the region can be broadly grouped under the following categories:
a. 'National' conflicts: Involving concept of a distinct 'homeland' as a separate
nation and pursuit of the realisation of that goal by its votaries.
b. Ethnic conflicts: Involving assertion of numerically smaller and less dominant
tribal groups against the political and cultural hold of the dominant tribal
group. In Assam this also takes the form of tension between local and migrant
communities.
c. Sub-regional conflicts: Involving movements which ask for recognition of
sub-regional aspirations and often come in direct conflict with the State
Governments or even the autonomous Councils.
Besides, criminal enterprise aimed at expanding and consolidating control over critical
economic resources has, of late, acquired the characteristics of a distinct species of
conflict.
Modes of Conflict Resolution
The modes of conflict resolution in the North East have been through; (i) security forces/
'police action'; (ii) more local autonomy through mechanisms such as conferment of
Statehood, the Sixth Schedule, Article 371 C of the Constitution in case of Manipur and
through 'tribe specific accords' in Assam etc; (iii) negotiations with insurgent outfits; and
(iv) development activities including special economic packages. Many of these methods
have proved successful in the short-term. However, some of these interventions have had
unintended, deleterious consequences as well.

Capacity Building for Conflict Resolution - Friction to Fusion
The Commission has already recommended that the Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act
1958 may be repealed with some of its provisions incorporated in the Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Act, 1967 to enable the Security Forces to have operational freedom consistent
with human rights concerns.
The Commission would, like to reiterate that even in dealing with the purely 'law and
order aspects' of insurgency and violence in the region, much greater reliance needs to be
placed on the local police. While deployment of the Armed Forces of the Union may be
required, there is a strong case for minimising their use for operational purposes in a region
which still continues to harbour a sense of alienation. Similarly, utilising the 'non-police
components' of administration and civil society organisations for handling conflicts needs
much, greater attention than has so far been given.
The other mode of conflict resolution is the developmental approach. That the fruits of
development have not adequately percolated to the beneficiaries is widely recognized.
The reasons for such failure vary from lack of local absorptive capacity and inappropriate
development strategies to corruption and diversion of funds, often to the coffers of
insurgents. Of particular concern is the well documented siphoning of food-grains meant
for the public distribution system a large proportion of which falls in the hands of the
militants. Similarly, the virtual extortion racket run by various militant groups at a number
of points, marking several transitions from one militant group's area of influence to the
next, collection of protection money from business and salaried classes etc have been
extensively documented. Consequently, many observers feel that some parts of the North
East now represent a state of 'stable anarchy' where the rule of law and other institutions
of governance are subverted directly or through collusive arrangements, to serve personal
or partisan ends of the militants.
Reform and capacity building ofv arious institutions of governance are, therefore, essential if
development efforts are to play their intended role in reducing disparities and alienation.
Conflict Resolution - the Political Paradigm
At the political level, what is now required is the strengthening of the rule of law and
constitutional politics, the authority and legitimacy of the democratically elected State
and local governments. This would satisfy the need for introducing accountability
and democratic practice into the conflict resolution machinery in the North East.
Capacity Building for Conflict ~solution

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Capacity Building in Administration
Familiarity with the place and its issues, professional competence and a sense of empathy
with the people are all essential pre-requisites for civil servants belonging to both the All
India Services as also to the services under the State Governments. Local officials, both
direct recruits and 'promotees', complain about limited opportunities for professional
development as they do not get adequate opportunities to serve outside the region. Members
of the State services, particularly, have limited exposure to diverse work situations. The
extreme shortage of officers in the North Eastern States is attributed by many to the system
of cadre allotment in the All India Services as per which insiders have very little chance of
being allotted their home state. .
There is a close link between a committed and stable administration and prevention and
resolution of conflicts. Until the 1970s, officers from outside Assam and the then Union
Territories in the region were willing to serve in the North East particularly on deputation.
Today, it is regarded as a punishment posting; one of the reasons being that almost all the
States are affected, in one form or another, by insurgency or due to limited "professional"
experience. Regional institutions involved with the development of the area such as the
NEe which were once vibrant, are much less effective now. There is an urgent need to
reverse this trend. Government of India, in recognition of the difficult conditions in the
North East, has already given several special incentives and facilities to officers working in
this region. Perhaps, these need to be enlarged with more choices like permitting officers
to have government accommodation at a place of their choice rather than at the last place
of posting. Similarly, opportunities to work in larger States for increased professional
experience is also advisable. Simultaneously, there should be more opportunities for local
officers including those from the Technical Services on secondment to serve outside their
States. Setting up regional training institutions for administrative and technical officials,
liberal funding for obtaining higher qualifications in the country and abroad are some other
incentives which should be provided.
Institutional capacity building within the administrative apparatus is as important as capacity
upgradation of administrative personnel. The political executive, within the North Eastern
States, too, needs to be sensitised to the imperatives of systemic reforms for peace, order
and development. Initiatives for good governance in the region would include laying down
a concrete charter for administrative reforms and good governance in the region in close
association with the States and its systematic monitoring by the NEe. There is also a case
for taking into account the performance of States in fulfilling their commitments under
the charter of the NEe for determining their eligibility for special economic packages or
other specified items of funding.

Capacity Building for Conflict Resolution - Friction to Fusion
Capacity Building in Police
The only regional level institution for training police officials is the North Eastern 'Police
Academy (NEPA) near Shillong which caters to the induction level training of Gazetted
police officers of all States in the region other than Assam. NEPA has the potential to be
the nodal training institution for civil police officers in handling insurgency. The institution
needs to be strengthened through augmentation of infrastructure and induction of instructors
from various sources including the Central Police Organisations on attractive conditions.
Considerable financial and other incentives are necessary to induce police officers with
proven track record in operational matters to work in the academy.
The Commission feels it is imperative that norms of deployment are worked out for each
State having regard to the local situation so that the benefits of (at least) relatively comfortable
police strength are available to the largely insecure population. Inter-State movement of
police personnel at all levels is as important as similar ventures in civil administration. If
opportunity could be provided to police officials, particularly at the level of Inspectors (and
equivalent in the armed police) to serve in the Central Police Organisations, the results
should be particularly rewarding for developing professionalism. Bringing officers from
outside the region will also have similar benefits.
Capacity Building in Local Governance Institutions
The Sixth Schedule Councils have been given more powers than the local bodies (before or
even after the Seventy-third Amendment), in the rest of the country. It is generally agreed
that the autonomy paradigm prescribed under it has brought a degree of equilibrium within
tribal societies particularly through formal dispute resolution under customary laws and
through control of money-lending etc. In Assam, Tripura and Mizoram, the autonomous
Councils have power to decide if a State legislation, on a subject under the competence of
the Council, may not apply or only apply with such exceptions as may be decided by these
bodies within their territories. Union legislations on similar subjects can be excluded from
applying to these areas by the State Government in Assam and the Union Government
in the other two States. Such areas are visualised as administratively 'self-sufficient'. In
fact, the Schedule has meant State level executive agencies withdrawing from such areas
as became evident in the context of disturbances in Karbi Anglong. Meghalaya displays a
peculiar situation as, despite the formation of the State, the whole of the State continues to
be under the Sixth Schedule causing frequent conflicts with the State Government which,
however, enjoys certain overriding powers over these bodies including the supremacy of
State legislation vis a vis 'Council legislation'. While the continuance of autonomous
Councils in Meghalaya is said to have contributed to maintenance of inter-tribe equations,

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
the arrangement has frequently resulted in conflicts with the State Government. It was
argued by the State officials that the arrangement of the geographical area of the State and
the Councils being identical, was unprecedented in the region. It was also contended that
in the circumstances of a predominantly tribal State like Meghalaya, district level legislative
bodies were no long-r€ necessary.
Representatives of the Councils expressed dissatisfaction about their inter-face with the State
Governments concerned - there was a feeling that these autonomous bodies are treated
as extensions of the Government. While the various provisions of the Schedule create an
impression that the Governor under that Schedule is to act at his discretion, the present
position is that in almost all matters the Governor acts on the aid and advice of the Council
of Ministers. For matters requiring approval or ratification of the Assembly, it is obvious
that the Governor would be acting on the 'aid and advice' and not in his discretion. There
are other provisions, where there is scope for the Governor to act in his judgment after
obtaining inputs from suitable sources including the State Government. The Commission
is of the view that having regard to the spirit of the wide autonomy that underlines the
Sixth Schedule, this aspect needs to be examined by the Ministry of Home Affairs.
At the commencement of the Constitution and for more than two decades thereafter, all
the Autonomous Districts were located within the State of Assam. It was therefore quite in
order in that State for the Governor to appoint a Commission to inquire into the state of
administration in such districts. With four States now having such districts, this arrangement
deserves reconsideration. Besides, in the last two decades this provision has not been invoked
at all resulting in lower standards of governance in these sensitive areas. In the opinion of
the Commission, there is a case for a common Commission for all Autonomous Districts
under the Schedule by the Union Government and for providing appointment of such a
Commission at fixed intervals. The Commission also notes that a similar recommendation
has been made by the Expert Committee of the Ministry of Panchayati Raj.
Another emerging area of conflict is the rising disparity between the autonomous Councils
and the local bodies established in pursuance of the Seventy-third Amendment as the latter
are being more liberally funded through the State Finance Commissions. This disparity
is likely to become particularly important in Assam and Tripura where both categories of
local bodies co-exist. Similarly, there is a feeling of discontent in the two older Councils of
Assam over what is perceived as preferential treatment to the new autonomous Council viz
the Bodoland Territorial Council, in the matter of procedures relating to release of funds
as well as the basis of budget allocations etc. While Article 243 M (1) expressly exempts
areas under the Sixth Schedule from operation of the Seventy-third Amendment, there is
no bar on some of the arrangements introduced by it to be engrafted in that Schedule.

Capacity Building for Conflict Resolution - Friction to Fusion
Village Level Self-governance in the Tribal North East
An examination of the Sixth Schedule reveals that it gives ample scope for providing village
self-governance. Clauses (e) and (f) of paragraph 3 (1) provide for establishment of, inter
alia, Village Committees / Councils and investing them with powers and other functions
relating to village administration including village policing, public health and sanitation
etc. There is nothing in these clauses to suggest that these bodies cannot be elected. Given
the scheme of the Schedule, establishment of elected village Councils will require suitable
legislations by the Autonomous Councils concerned. To induce the Councils to adopt this
'reform agenda', it may be necessary to link discharge of this responsibility with release
of part of the grants to the Councils. Whether elected village Councils should necessarily
replace traditional village headmen is a ticklish question and has to be approached with
tact, caution and patience.
Wherever justice is administered by village level institutions, particularly in the Sixth
Schedule areas, the laws applicable particularly in respect ofland and boundary disputes are
local customary laws. In the absence of codification of such laws, there is often ambiguity
about their integration resulting in parties being dis-satisfied and this age old system of
conflict resolution becoming less effective. This underscores the need for codification of
customary laws including those based on local usage. The codification of the customary laws
by the Chakma Autonomous Council in Mizoram is generally recognised as a conspicuous
success. It is imperative that in all States where by virtue of the Sixth Schedule or other
laws, village bodies administer justice, the applicable laws are duly codified by the tribes
with the help of the government.
Tribe Specific Councils in Assam
Six tribe-specific Councils straddling twelve districts ofA ssam exist in areas where three-tier
Panchayati Raj Institutions have already been established along with corresponding village
councils. An unusual feature of the Councils is that in order to cover as many habitations of
the 'tribe concerned' as possible their jurisdiction not only transcends district boundaries but
also 'skips' areas lacking the relevant population to cover pockets of that population in the
so called 'satellite areas'. In other words, the jurisdiction of such Council is often spread over
geographically 'non-contiguous' areas. These bodies are a culmination of conflict resolution
exercises undertaken by the Government of Assam to deal with assertion of identity by the
tribes concerned. In fact, each of the Councils is the result of 'accords' entered between the
government and the tribe concerned during the 1990s.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
In view of the lack of spatial cohesion of these bodies, their programmes in areas like
rural roads, minor irrigation, control of soil erosion and village and cottage industries are
impossible to implement. Aspirations of tribes not dominating a geographically discrete
area could perhaps be met only through imperfect solutions like these. The arrangement,
however, gives cause for concern as to its long-term viability and apprehension that this
conflict resolution measure could spawn more conflicts. Clearly, efforts must be made to
ensure that, as far as possible, the role to be performed by tribe specific bodies does not
overlap those of the Panchayati Raj Institutions. The basic objectives could best be achieved
if the functional responsibilities of the two streams are kept distinct.
Capacity Building in Regional Institutions
The North Eastern Council
One of the primary functions of the Council is to act as a forum to review the pace of
development in the region. The mandate of the Council which discuss 'issues of common
interest to two or more States and to advise the Union Government thereon' was withdrawn.
The 'withdrawn responsibility' was identical to the mandate given to the Zonal Councils
under the States Reorganisation Act, 1956. While the Commission is not recommending
the rejuvenuation of the Zonal Councils in other regions for the reasons mentioned in
Chapter 14, it is dear that in matters like movement of supplies, including food-grains
and passengers, local taxation policies and border disputes etc, a coordinating and problem
solving forum is still highly relevant for the North Eastern Region. It is, therefore, imperative
that the original provisions for inter-State coordination with its direct nexus with conflict
resolution is restored.
The amendments to the NEC Act of2002, more explicitly state its responsibility to review
maintenance of security and public order. Explicit introduction of this responsibility through
the 2002 amendment, creates problems for the DONER, as the 'administrative Ministry'
for the NEC. DONER has been assigned no role in the sphere of security in the region.
NEC, therefore, has to directly deal with the Ministry of Home Affairs in discharging this
responsibility. If the ambit of 'internal security reviews' has to extend even a little beyond
holding meetings, the NEC secretariat will need to be more actively involved in security
coordination issues. Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) also needs to take a view whether
'security and public order reviews' under the aegis of the NEC offer benefits which cannot be
had by the MBA's own reviews. MHA must further consider whether special empowerment
of the NEC entailed by this responsibility will result in increased administrative burden
on the agencies normally involved in monitoring the law and order scenario in the region.
To effectively coordinate or even assist in deliberations on internal security related issues,

Capacity Building for Conflict Resolution - Friction to Fusion
the Council secretariat would need suitable augmentation. In short, adequate preparatory
arrangements are necessary if the renewed mandate of the NEC for internal security reviews
is to be meaningfully discharged.
As, governance and development are so intertwined in the North East, a possible outline
of a scheme to initiate the practice of regional planning may be indicated:
(a) Regional Plans cannot supplant State plans. Regional plans must, therefore, be
primarily directed at reducing disparities and avoiding infructuous inter-State
competition.
(b) NEC can fulfil its role as a regional planner, in the sense outlined above, if
the procedures and methods of formulation of plans are so amended by the
Planning Commission that NEC becomes an active participant in all aspects
of planning in the region and in the member-States.
(c) Similarly, some of the 'heads of development' could be transferred out of the
State plans and dealt with as part of the regional plan. The Union Government
will need to work out ways and means of involving NEC with the schemes
and programmes of various nodal ministries so that the content and delivery
of such programmes adequately reflect the region specific concerns.
(e ) Regional planning is particularly relevant to ensure that the 'strengths' of the
region are properly utilised. It is desirable that a lO-year perspective plan is
prepared for the entire region encompassing areas like development of human
resources and infrastructure. A governance reform agenda should also form part
of this plan. This comprehensive plan may be reviewed by the Prime Minister
regularly with the Chief Ministers.
DONER
Despite the formation of this Ministry, the Government of India (Allocation of Business)
Rules do not give overall 'nodal responsibility' for the region to DONER - this continues
with the Ministry of Home Affairs. The R~les only declare DONER to be the nodal
Ministry for the NEC. The concurrent existence of DONER and NEC has posed issues
of coordination and duplication of efforts. It also deprives the North Eastern States of the
expert guidance of nodal Ministries like Power and Water Resources as these Ministries
have often taken the view that insofar as the North East is concerned, their responsibilities
are now substantially taken over by DONER. The division of development and other
responsibilities between the MHA and DONER is not conducive to long term growth

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
and well being of the region - the chronic conflict scenario in the region requires that its
territorial responsibility must continue to be with the MHA.
Meaningful monitoring of development is more effectively achieved from Shillong (the
NEC headquarters) than by DONER operating from Delhi. At the same time, the limited
technical expertise available locally makes it particularly important that the nodal Ministries
in Government of India renew their interest in development ofits water and power resources
and augmentation of infrastructure.
After carefully taking into account all relevant factors, the Commission is of the view that
continuance of a 'stand alone' Ministry with partial responsibility for the region is not in
its long term interests. The Commission, therefore, recommends abolition of DONER.
The Commission is further of the view that with the measures being recommended in this
Report for making the NEC a more effective agency for the over-all growth of the North
East through integrated regional planning and better inter-State coordination, some of the
responsibilities of DONER like sanctions from the Non-Lapsable Central Pool ofResouces
(NLCPR) and monitoring of special economic packages could be carried out by the NEC
(along with the Ministries concerned with the initiatives being financed from the pool).
The Commission would like to draw attention to some of the regional level institutions
which need much greater attention so that their benefits may accrue to the entire region.
The North Eastern Hill University (NEHU) was set up in 1975 for nurturing the intellectual
development of the entire region. While NEHU has developed some innovative academic
programmes, establishment of other Universities has resulted in diluting the 'academic
leadership' role for NEHU. There is a case for developing this institution as a centre for
excellence for regional issues in economics, politics, culture, society and environment which
transcend inter-State borders. Similarly, the North Eastern Indira Gandhi Regional Institute
of Health & Medical Sciences (NEIGRIHMS) Shillong, apart from being commissioned
after considerable delay has not yet been able to emerge as the regional 'hub' for tertiary
health care.
National Register ofI ndian Citizens
The Commission is of the view that the MNIC project should be taken up on a priority
basis. The Commission also notes that there are several Union and State Government
agencies which issue similar identity cards. It would be necessary to achieve convergence
amongst all such systems so that the MNIC becomes the basic document for identification
of a person and can lend itself to be used as a multi-purpose individual card.
I ,

Capacity Building for Conflict Resolution - Friction to Fusion
Capacity Building - Miscellaneous Issues
There are a number of matters concerning development administration and related aspects
which could if properly addressed and resolved minimise future conflicts.
(a) With the primary sector accounting for 55-60 per cent of the income and the
secondary sector for 55-60 per cent of the income, it is the country's most
backward region industrially largely due to woefully weak infrastructure. The
Planning Commission recommended an amount of Rs.l,03,014 crore for
bridging the identified gaps - a recommendation that remains unimplemented.
This recommendation along with the report of the Task Force of the NEC on
Development Initiatives may be taken into account and should form the basis
for assessing the requirement of funds for bridging the infrastructural gaps in
the North East.
(b) To promote industrialisation, a comprehensive policy framework needs to
be evolved and put in place to promote the region as a preferred investment
destination.
(c) There is need to have a systematic approach to road construction in the region.
A region specific Transport Development Fund should be set up to which
funds from all windows should flow and the fund could be utilised to finance
construction of all-important corridors.
(d) The rate of unemployment in the region is almost double the all-India figure.
This calls for the preparation of an action plan for the region for generating
employment opportunities which should cover industries and allied sectors.
(f) While geo-political factors and the imperatives of an increasingly integrated
economy dictate that India as a country should engage itself more actively with
countries on its east in trade, commerce and finance, reasons of geography
present particularly promising opportunities to the States in the North East
which abut areas that have begun to enjoy the fruits of regional economic
development. Long term economic growth of the region is, therefore, intimately
connected with implementation of sound strategies to make the 'look east
policy' happen.
(g) While some progress has been achieved in bringing all the States of the
region within the rail map of the country, this exercise should be made more

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
meaningful by providing broadguage connectivity and early completion of the
projects.
(h) Much greater efforts are needed to establish bank branches and other credit
disbursement outlets through further relaxation and incentivisation in policies
of the Reserve Bank and other financial institutions. The situation remains
highly unsatisfactory in the insurance sector.
(i) Due to lack of higher educational infrastructure in the North East, a very large
number of students migrate to other parts of the country for education. This
re-emphasises the need for setting up of centres of excellence for professional
and higher education in the North East.
(j) There is a need to make an in-depth study of the c\fstomary judicial system
in order to achieve better understanding and dissemination of the prevailing
norms and practices.
(k) It is necessary to evolve a credible system of maintenance of land records.
OPERATIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR CONFLICT MANAGEMENT
The Commission earnestly hopes that its recommendations on Police Reforms will enable
the Police to playa major role that goes beyond the normal policing functions of crime
prevention and detection and maintenance of public order to a more effective participation
in conflict prevention.
A great deal still remains to be done to sensitise police personnel in diagnosing emerging
conflicts and devising 'non-Police' methods to forestall their exacerbation. There is need
for their training and orientation to be so designed that inculcates in police personnel at
all levels a consciousness that resolution of conflicts is a distinct and important element in
their charter of responsibilities.
The Executive Magistracy at the cutting edge level has become increasingly isolated from the
process of administration of criminal justice. While the District Magistrate may still retain
a degree of participation and accountability, the 'subordinate' Executive Magistrates are left
with a restricted role. What is needed is encouragement to the Executive Magistrates to be
proactive in conflict management, its prevention and regulation while acting as Revenue
officers. This would necessitate State Governments devising an innovative institutional
approach to conflict resolution i.e. approaches outside the 'Police - Law and Order'
paradigm.

Capacity Building for Conflict Resolution - Friction to Fusion
Judicial Delays and Alternative Dispute Redressal
The Commission observes that acute shortage of judicial officers and dilatoriness of some
of the procedures governing judicial proceedings are among the basic reasons for tardy
resolution of disputes through the judiciary. The Commission hopes that the 13th Finance
Commission gives priority to the issue of judicial arrears and considers adequate resource
allocation for administration of justice so that upgradation of personnel and infrastructure
is possible at a scale commensurate with the magnitude of the problem.
The innovation of Lok Adalats has proved successful only to some extent. Lack of support
from sections of the Bar to the Lok Adalats is perhaps a cause for its limited success. Another
aspect that deserves to be mentioned is the view consistently taken by the higher judiciary
that the specialised quasi judicial tribunals are subject to the supervisory jurisdiction of
the High Courts under Article 227 of the Constitution. This judicial interpretation has
adversely affected dispute resolution in many areas of our economy and has contributed
enormously to the arrears of cases in the Supreme Court and the High Courts.
Civil Society and Conflict Resolution
There is need to draw up a suitable policy framework for involving civil society organisations
and other non-government sources to ensure that they are involved in a sustained and
systematic manner, when required, rather than in an ad hoc, knee-jerk way when there is
a crisis with little scope or time for planning their meaningful involvement. The need to
involve Panchayati Raj institutions in prevention and resolution of local conflicts needs to
be strongly encouraged because there is enormous capacity in these bodies to supplement
the time tested roles of the police and the executive magistracy.
INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR CONFLICT MANAGEMENT
Important Official Conflict Prevention I Resolution Agencies
Institutions under the Constitution
This Commission, after careful consideration, is of the view that the Inter-State Council
must be given the 'complete' role provided to it under the Constitution i.e. both conflict
resolution and for better coordination of policy and action in matters of interest to the Union
and States. For resolution of conflicts, whether inter-State or Union-State, the mechanism of
'inquiring and advising', even without having the power to adjudicate, envisaged by clause
(a) of Article 263 can be an effective method to resolve disputes as has been demonstrated
by the conspicuous success of the Committee of State Finance Ministers constituted by

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
the National Development Council in achieving consensus on the once highly contentious
issue of Value Added Tax (VAT).
The Commission is of the view that the Inter-State Council should be constituted as and
when the need in that behalf arises and that the Council need not exist in perpetuity. The
C<;>mmission is further of the view that an Inter-State Council could best serve its purpose
as a pro tem body with a flexible composition suited to its terms of reference. The present
omnibus Council may be dissolved, if need be after deciding on the basic common principles
to be followed by the Government of India in the formation of ad-hoc councils. It also
follows that there is no bar or other impediment for constituting more than one Council
at a given time - with different composition for each - to consider different disputes or
other matters of concern to different States and the Union. This approach would also
facilitate meaningful, result-oriented discussions by parties directly interested in an item
and facilitate time-bound solutions.
So far no independent assessment of the functioning of The National Commissions for
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes has been undertaken. Apparently, their Reports
have also not received much attention. A perusal of these Reports, however, suggests that
considerable time and effort is taken in addressing individual complaints and grievances
of government and public sector employees belonging to the relevant categories. While
reviewing the safeguards provided for SC/ST, including in personnel policies, is an
important task of these Commissions, it is necessary that a distinction is drawn between
group grievances and individual claims relating to promotions, transfers, postings etc. It is
also evident that the secretariats of the two Commissions need to build suitable capacity
for monitoring and evaluation of programmes, including monitoring of (action research',
carried out by other institutions on the socio-economic status ofSC/ST.The administrative
ministries responsible for these Commissions must carefully consider, in consultation
with the Commissions, ways and means of enabling them to effectively discharge their
constitutional responsibilities.
Statutory Bodies
The Zonal Councils
Over time however, the Zonal Councils have met only occasionally. The Secretariats have ·
ceased to be operational and the practice of State Chief Secretaries acting as Secretaries of
the Councils on rotating basis, too, has hardly ever been acted upon. These bodies have
become a peripheral responsibility of the Ministry of Home Affairs through the Inter
State Council Secretariat. There is no doubt that the Zonal Councils played a significant

Capacity Building for Conflict Resolution - Friction to Fusion
role in ironing out problems arising out of States' reorganisation, but once these problems
were settled, there was a definite decline of interest on the part of the member-States. The
recent creation of the States of Uttarakhand, Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh has not resulted
in reactivation of the appropriate Zonal Councils and necessary coordination has been
carried out bilaterally by the State Governments. In short, the Zonal Councils are not only
dormant, but there appears to be a lack of interest in their reactivation.
Institutions Established under Executive Orders
7he National Integration Council (NIC)
While a body with the varied and all encompassing mandate of the NIC will necessarily
have a large membership, it is desirable that there is a normative basis for its composition.
All exercise may therefore be undertaken to identify areas which need representation in the
NIC and to lay down an indicative 'catchment area' from which its membership could be
drawn. This will obviate criticism or dissatisfaction about non-representation of specific
interest groups.
Important issues of national and societal cohesion admit of a diversity of opinions and
perceptions. Issues of national cohesion and harmony considered by the NIC are best
discussed through structured exchange of views. Development of mutual understanding
and cooperation is particularly necessary for maintaining collegiality and tolerance in a body
with the varied composition of the NIC. This objective will be considerably facilitated if
much of the substantive business of the NIC is carried out through smaller, subject matter
specific committees where more in-depth consideration may precede broad discussions in the
'full' NIC. Similarly, deliberations in the NIC are not an end in themselves - it is necessary
that the conclusion worked out in its forum is utilised for wider consensus. Placing ofNIC
discussion and their conclusion in Parliament would seem to be a step in that direction.
Issues concerning the unity and emotional integrity of the nation also need to be gone into
by academics from multi-disciplinary angles - this approach enables understanding and
dissecting the multiple layers of factors inhibiting the emergence of a socially integrated
nation despite the mosaic of diversities. Valuable contributions have been made towards this
direction by historians, political scientists, sociologists and economists. These efforts require
much greater focus through a common platform so that the intellectual underpinnings of the
task could be properly understood and translated into sound policies and processes. There is,
therefore, need to create such a platform either in an existing institution or setting up a new
autonomous organisation to carry out research and to function as a 'think tank' on matters
conducive to promotion of national integration. The Indian Council of Social Science
Research - ICSSR - and the Planning Commission may take a lead in the matter.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
National Development Council (NDC)
The NDC was originally intended to 'mobilise the nation in support of the five-year plans
and to promote economic policies for balanced and rapid growth'. The mandate subsequently
became somewhat more structured with the NDC having the authority to accord approval
to the Five Year Plans and important development initiatives. The NDC has often succeeded
in building consensus on controversial policy issues through its committees and in earlier
years, the discussions in the NDC itself were substantive. The limitations of unstructured
discussions and "transaction of business" mainly through prepared speeches apply also
to the NDC. The NDC could playa more effective role in building consensus to avoid
serious differences of opinion on issues like economic development including allocation
of resources and facilitating balanced, sustainable development while addressing concerns
like regional disparities.
Other Institutional Innovations
Establishing State level Integration Councils to discuss State-specific conflict situations,
including potential conflicts, and providing a mechanism of networking such Councils
with the NIC. This networking may be achieved through bringing some of the important
issues discussed in the State level body to the NIC for its advice and for a national consensus
on such issues wherever required. Similarly, while formulating guidelines for deciding the
composition of the NIC, the Union Government may provide for some representation
to the State level bodies. Similar bodies may also be visualised for the District level with
linkages to the State Integration Councils.

COMBATTING TERRORISM
- Protecting by Righteousness
Strategy to Counter Terrorism
. A Multi-pronged Approach
Dealing with the menace of terrorism would require a comprehensive strategy in which
different stakeholders - the Government, political parties, security agencies, civil society
and the media - would have an important role to play. This strategy should amalgamate
political, social, economic, administrative, police and other measures. The necessary
elements of such a strategy are:
Political consensus: Political parties must arrive at a national consensus on the need for the
broad contours of such a planned strategy. While attempting such a national consensus on
an issue of considerable criticality, it deserves to be borne in mind that the people of our
country have a right to expect that our national as well as regional parties will rise above
their sectarian and petty electoral compulsions.
Good governance and socioeconomic development: This would necessitate high priority
being given to development work and its actual implementation on the ground for which
a dean, corruption-free and accountable administration at all levels is an imperative
necessity.
Respect for rule of law: Governmental agencies must not be allowed to transgress law even
in dealing with critical situations caused by insurgency or terrorism. If an extraordinary
situation cannot be dealt with by the existing laws, new laws may be enacted so that
law enforcement agencies are not provoked or tempted to resort to extra-legal or illegal
methods. Police and all other governmental forces must adhere to some basic codes of
conduct
Countering the subversive activIties of terrorists: Government must give pnonty to
defeating political subversions. The emphasis should be on civil as opposed to military
measures to counter terrorism and insurgency. Psychological 'warfare' or management
of information services and the media, in conjunction with the intelligence wing of the
police, can play an important role in achieving this objective.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Providing the appropriate legal framework: Terrorism is an extraordinary crime. The
ordinary laws of the land may not be adequate to book a terrorist. This may require special
laws and effective enforcement mechanisms, but with sufficient safeguards to prevent its
misuse.
Building capacity: The capacity building exercise should extend to the intelligence
gathering machinery, security agencies, civil administration and the society at large.
DEALING WITH TERRORISM: LEGAL FRAMEWORK
The Legal Framework
Need for a Comprehensive Anti Terrorist Legislation
The Law Commission of India, in its 173rd Report on Prevention ofT errorism Bill, 2000,
had recommended a separate legislation to deal with the menace of terrorism. The draft bill
as recommended by the Law Commission of India included provisions such as definition
of terrorist acts, enhanced punishment for such acts, possession of certain unauthorized
arms, special powers of investigating officers regarding seizure and attachment of property
representing proceeds of terrorism, constitution of special courts, protection of witnesses,
confessions made to police officers to be taken into consideration, enhanced police custody,
constitution of review committees, protection of action taken in good faith etc.
The need for a comprehensive anti-terrorism legislation cannot be better illustrated than
by the judgement of the Apex Court in the Rajiv Gandhi assassination case. While the
provisions of the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987 have generally
been decried as being harsh, none of these could be applied to the perpetrators of the act
as the Apex Court held that neither was it a terrorist act uls 3(1) nor were the activities of
the perpetrators 'disruptive' uls 4 of the TADA Act.
The Commission has carefully considered how this situation can be best tackled. There
is definitely a need to have stringent provisions to deal with terrorists. The Commission
also recognizes that there could be a propensity to abuse such provisions. However, when
faced with the need to protect national security and integrity, there is ample justification
for having strong anti-terrorism provisions in the law. In fact, many western countries
with strong traditions of democracy and civil liberty have enacted such legislations to deal
with the threat of terrorism and their laws contain provisions pertaining to constitution
of special fast track courts, making release on bail extremely difficult for the accused,

Combatting Terrorism : Protecting by Righteousness
enhanced penalties cutting the source of funding for terror activities etc. The Commission
is of the view that while terrorism is indeed an extraordinary threat which requires special
legal provisions to deal with it, there is also need to provide sufficient safeguards to prevent
its misuse.
The Commission has examined whether the Unlawful Activities Prevention Act is
the appropriate legislation to incorporate provisions to combat terrorism. After due
consideration, the Commission is of the view that instead of the Unlawful Activities
Prevention Act, it would be more appropriate if a new chapter on terrorism is made a part
of the National Security Act, 1980.
Definition of Terrorism
The Commission feels that assassination of important public figures, as also murder of
public functionaries by way of revenge or with a view to subdue others in the organization,
should be categorized as a terrorist act.
Inclusion of Terror Financing in the Definition ofa 'Terrorist Act'
Any counter terrorism strategy can succeed only if the sources of terrorist funding are
blocked which is why recent trends in anti terror legislation worldwide focus on this aspect
of the fight against terrorism.
Providing material support, including raising or channelising funds for terrorist activities
is as serious an offence as the terrorist act itself and deserves severe punishment. This could
be ensured by the inclusion of 'raising funds intended for the purpose of terrorism' in the
definition of a 'terrorist act'.
The Commission feels that including provisions which make the possession of certain arms
etc. and commission of certain acts by members or supporters of 'terrorist organizations'
a 'terrorist act' would strengthen the law enforcement authorities in their fight against
terrorism. Whether such an act results in the loss, injury or damage mentioned above is
inconsequential, what is paramount is the commission of the act by members or supporters
of terrorist organizations on possession of certain arms etc. Accordingly, paragraph (b) of
Section 3(1) under POTA which was not included in the Unlawful Activities (Prevention)
Amendment Act, 2004 should be included in the definition of a 'terrorist act' in the
proposed new legislation. However, it should cover not only the acts committed by
members or supporters of terrorist organizations resulting in 'loss of human life or grievous
injury to any person' or causing 'significant damage to any property', but also acts which
are likely to cause such death, injury or damage.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Bail Provisions
In laws dealing with terrorism, the bail provisions are made stringent so that the accused
does not get easily released on bail.
Investigation agencies have put forward the argument that persons accused of terrorism are
not ordinary criminals and witnesses are afraid to depose against such persons. Therefore
gathering evidence against them is difficult and time consuming, and if such persons are
let out on bail they are bound to adversely influence the investigation.
The Law Commission examined this issue in its 173rd Report.
The Law Commission did not suggest any modification to the somewhat stringent
conditions for release oft he accused on bail, which were present in TADA.The Commission
is of the view that there is no need to dilute the provisions of bail as they existed in POTA.
A closer scrutiny of the provisions would reveal that the test whether there are grounds for
believing that the accused is innocent, has to be applied only when the prosecutor opposes
the release of an accused on bail. Since there is a tendency for investigation agencies and
the prosecution to oppose bail, a responsibility may be cast on both the investigation as
well as the prosecution that bail applications should not be opposed in a routine manner
and there must be application of mind to ascertain whether detention of an accused is
required or not. This should be further fortified by an independent application of mind
by the Review Committee (paragraph 4.7) which should advise the prosecution whether
a bail application needs to be opposed or not and also on whether bail may be granted
under certain circumstances.
Period ofD etention (Remand) during Investigation
The provisions of both TADA and POTA provided for extended periods of remand. It
has been argued that these provisions enabling extended periods of remand could result
in unnecessary detentions and therefore the provisions of CrPC should be adhered to. On
the other hand, the investigating agencies are of the view that these provisions of extended
remand are necessary in cases involving terrorist related offences as people rarely come
forward to depose because of fear of retribution. Also, there are complex crime networks
sometimes involving transnational links and therefore these may require longer period of
remand for successful investigation.
The Commission agrees that in terrorist related offences, witnesses are generally reluctant
to depose because of fear of reprisals and also that investigating such cases are usually more

Combatting Terrorism: Protecting by Righteousness
complex and time consuming than ordinary crimes .. This could necessitate a more intense
and prolonged investigation by the police. Therefore the time limits specified under the
CrPC may not be adequate. At the same time the limits prescribed under TADA were
longer than required. POTA tried to achieve a fine balance as far as these time limits
were concerned. Therefore, the Commission feels that the provisions of POTA regarding
remand and completion of investigation may be restored and incorporated in the new
law.
Confession before a Police Officer
The issue of admissibility of confessions made before the police has been examined by
several Law Commissions. The Law Commission in its Forty-Eighth Report favoured the
admissibility of confessions made before the police. The Law Commission in its Sixty
Ninth Report revisited this issue and reaffirmed the suggestion made in the Forty-Eighth
Report. Once again, the Law Commission examined the subject in great detail in its One
Eighty-Fifth Report and recommended that confessions made before the police should not
be admissible under ordinary laws but could be admissible in case of grave offences like
terrorism. The Committee on Reforms of the Criminal Justice System, 2003 recommended
that Section 25 of the Indian Evidence Act should be amended to render confessions made
before a police officer, admissible as evidence.
Those opposing the admissibility of confessions before the police have argued that if an
accused is willing to make a voluntary confession, then he could easily be produced before
a Magistrate rather than being produced before a senior police officer. It is also argued
that police may resort to coercive methods in order to extract confessions. The amended
UAPA , therefore did not provide for making confessions before the police as admissible
evidence.
The Commission has examined this issue in its report on 'Public Order' and has
recommended that the investigation agency should be supervised by an autonomous
Board of Investigation. It has also recommended that the staff of the investigation agency
should be specially trained for their job with emphasis on collecting evidence through
use of forensic tools and eschewing coercive methods. Moreover, the Commission has
recommended the setting up of a District Complaints Authority and also a State Police
Complaints Authority which would effectively deal with cases of any misconduct by the
police. The Commission was of the view that with these elaborate safeguards there should
be no reason to continue to distrust the police with regard to admissibility of statements
made before them.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
However, till such time that comprehensive police reforms are carried out, the Commission
is of the view that confessions and admissions whenever required may be made before
the judicial magistrate. There was provision in POTA which made certain confessions
admissible before the police. However it also stipulated that the person from whom a
confession has been recorded, shall be produced before the Court of a Chief Metropolitan
Magistrate or the Court of a Chief Judicial Magistrate along with the original statement
of confession, written or recorded on mechanical or electronic device within forty-eight
hours. Under the circumstances it would be better if the accused is produced directly
before the judicial magistrate as criminal courts/magistrates are normally available at the
taluka levels.
Presumptions under the Law
The Commission is of the view that because of the nature of the crime and the potential it
has to threaten the security and integrity of the country on the one hand and spread terror
among people on the other, it is necessary that the person who has indulged in the terrorist
act is not able to make use of the protection which is provided to an accused person under
the normal laws. In several cases, laws have provided for presumptions which may be
drawn by the court if certain facts are established. However, such presumptions are not
conclusive proofbut can be rebutted by the accused by adducing evidence to the contrary.
Both TADA and POTA had provisions wherein the court was under an obligation to draw
adverse inference provided certain facts were established. Such presumptions should be
made a necessary part of the new anti-terror law.
Review Committee
While stringent legal provisions regarding investigation, bail and trial etc. are necessary
for prosecuting persons charged with terrorist acts, it is equally necessary to provide for an
effective statutory institutional mechanism to check any misuse / abuse of these provisions.
The Commission, therefore, recommends that the proposed new chapter in the NSA
should provide for constitution of an independent review committee before which all
cases should be placed for review within 30 days of the registration of a case. This Review
Committee should carefully examine the evidence collected and other relevant material
and come to conclusion whether a prima facie case has been made out against the accused.
Such a review should be carried out every quarter till such time that the charge-sheet is
filed in the special court constituted to try cases of terrorism. If the Review Committee
concludes at any stage that no case exists against the accused, the prosecution will be
bound by such a decision.

Combatting Terrorism: Protecting by Righteousness
Witness Protection
The Commission would like to reiterate its recommendations in its Report on 'Public
Order' that ''A statutory programmme for guaranteeing anonymity of witnesses and for
witness protection in specified types of cases, based on the best international models should
be adopted early."
Special Courts
The new law should include provisions for constitution of Special Courts to expeditiously
try terrorism related offences. These Special Courts should be well equipped and fully
staffed with personnel including presiding officers and prosecutors who should be specially
trained to handle terrorism related cases. Presiding Officers and Prosecutors for such courts
should be carefully selected on the basis of their integrity, independence, professional
competence and track record. Since terrorist incidents are relatively few and far between
and geographically dispersed, instead of setting up permanent special court/courts in
every State it would be more appropriate and useful to set up fast track courts for trial
of such offences. Other specific provisions related to such Special Courts may also be
incorporated.
Possession ofA rms etc.
Section 5 ofTADA had made possession of any arms and ammunition which were specified
in Columns 2 and 3 of Category I or Category III(a) of Schedule I to the Arms Rules,
1962 or bombs, dynamite or other explosive substances unauthorisedly in a notified area,
an offence. The Law Commission in its 173rd Report had also retained this provision.
POTA retained and expanded the scope of this provision. Under POTA, a person
having unauthorised possession of these objects in both the cases was guilty of terrorist
act punishable with a term extending to life imprisonment. The State Government was
empowered to specify 'notified areas' by way of notification in the Official Gazette.
The deterrent effect of having such a provision, which is applicable in some instances
to both notified and non-notified areas is substantial. Thus, the new legal provisions on
terrorism should include a provision to this effect.
A Federal Agency to Investigate Terrorist Offinces
Apart from reiterating its recommendations regarding a Federal Agency contained in
the report on public orders the Commission is also of the view that mere setting up of
new ~gencies and structures would not suffice unless such agency/agencies are staffed by

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
personnel whose integrity and independence cannot be doubted, who are professionally
competent and have developed the required expertise in investigation of terrorism related
offences. The autonomy and independence of such agency should be ensured through a
laid down procedure of appointment and assured tenure of its personnel.
MEASURES AGAINST FINANCING OF TERRORISM
It is understood by the Commission, that Government of India, Ministry of Finance,
has already taken cognizance of most of these infirmities in the Prevention of Money
Laundering Act and is proposing to introduce amendments to include offences under the
SEBI Act, the Customs Act and those related to counterfeiting and printing of currency as
well as offences covered under Section 21 of Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
Act, Section 12 of Prevention of Corruption Act and offences under the Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Amendm~nt Act. The Commission would urge that the Bill containing these
amendments, which will substantially strengthen the country's ability to fight the menace
of money laundering, be expeditiously placed before Parliament.
Although the law enforcement agency has been empowered to attach property and conduct
search and seizure operations in relation to money laundering activities, Act can only take
place after the submission of the completion report of investigation under Section 173 of
CrPC to the Magistrate. In many cases, waiting for the investigation to be completed by
the police officer and filing of the report by him could provide ample opportunities for
obliterating the money laundering trail, destruction of evidence, movement of assets etc.
Thus, the Commission is of the view that there is a case for advancement of the stage at
which the search & seizure action or attachment of property could be undertaken. While
allowing for the same, adequate safeguards may also be provided in the Act in order to
reduce the scope for any possible misuse.
Investigation of Money Laundering Offences: The Directorate of Enforcement is the
law enforcing agency in the case of PMLA. The present composition and structure of
the irectorate of Enforcement is sound but it may be examined whether institutional
coordination mechanisms between the Directorate of Enforcement and other intelligence
collecting and coordinating agencies, could be strengthened and some provisions of the
PMLA delegated to them with the Enforcement Directorate, of course, remaining the
nodal agency.
Financial Intelligence Unit
After the PMLA was brought into force from 1st July, 2005, the reporting regime with
regard to financial transactions as envisaged in the Act also came into force. This also

Combatting Terrorism : Protecting by Righteousness
led to the creation of the Indian Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU-IND). Presently, all
banking companies including private foreign banks, co-operative banks, RRBs, financial
institutions including insurance companies, hire-purchase companies, chit funds, non
banking financial companies and intermediaries mentioned in Section 12 of SEBI Act
constitute a reporting entity. The reporting regime needs to be extended to high risk sectors
such as real-estate as well.
Co-ordination: Apart from the specific inputs provided by FIU-IND on transactions
suspected of being related to money laundering, the main forum for co-ordination and
cooperation among various agencies dealing with economic offences available to the
Directorate of Enforcement is the Regional Economic Intelligence Councils (REICs).
The REICs, constituted in 1996, are the nodal regional agencies for ensuring operational
coordination amongst different enforcement and investigation agencies dealing with
economic offences in their respective regions. As the Directorate of Enforcement is a
member of the REIC, it would be useful if the platform provided by them is also utilized
to coordinate among agencies in cases which are suspected to be linked with money
laundering. Further, owing to the complexity of cases involved, it would also be useful
if the FlU- IND, apart from disseminating agency specific information, furnishes overall
region-centric information to the CEIB for disseminating it to the respective REICs with
a view to expanding the information regime.
Measures undertaken in India
In order to thwart the menace of terrorism and block the financing of terrorist activities,
the new legal provisions on terrorism may also incorporate provisions regarding freezing
of assets, bank accounts, deposits etc. while investigating the financial trail in cases where
there is reasonable suspicion of their intended use in facilitating the commission of terrorist
acts. Such actions may be undertaken by the investigating officer with the prior approval
of a designated authority and subject to adequate safeguards.
Information/intelligence on terrorist financing activities could be, and are actually being,
generated by different intelligence and investigation agencies which are engaged in general
or specific fields of activities. Financing of terrorist activities can be done through a
multitude of modes. The Commission is of the view that owing to the scope for their
abuse, the investigation agencies having the authority to inquire into such activities need
to devote more resources and manpower to identify suspected terrorist financing activities
so that information could be provided to intelligence agencies and authorities empowered
to investigate terrorism cases.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
For concerted action on the financial leads provided by information gathered by various
sources, a specialized cell may be created in the proposed National Counter-terrorism
Centre drawing upon expertise from the Union Ministries of Finance and Home Affairs
and the Cabinet Secretariat. Further, different investigation agencies dealing with financial
transactions may set-up anti-terrorist finance cells within their organizations to augment
the efforts of intelligence agencies involved in counter-terrorism activities and facilitate
coordination among agencies.
While financing of terrorist activity through (conventional' methods such as currency
smuggling, counterfeiting, drug-trafficking, frauds, use of informal channels of money
transmission Chawala') etc. continues, methods such as online payments, trade-based
moneylaundering, abuse of charities, false claims etc. have increasingly assumed centre
stage. As investigation of transactions related to such activities requires specialized
investigation techniques and skills, there is need to develop multi-faceted investigation
teams. Apart from the present system of deputations to such agencies, it would be useful to
commission dedicated teams within these investigating agencies with a view to investigate
financial aspects of specific cases/group of cases by inducting officers having specialization
in different aspects of financial investigation for short periods. The objective would be
speedy and focused completion of the financial aspect of the investigation in such cases
within, say three to six months. The placement of officers belonging to different agencies/
organizations for such short periods and for specific cases would thus require arriving at an
understanding between the jurisdictional ministries of the Union and State Governments
and the organizations from which such officers would be sourced. A protocol for achieving
this may be arrived at to facilitate such capacity building, thereby strengthening the
effectiveness of counter-terrorist measures.
ROLE OF CITIZENS, CIVIL SOCIETY AND MEDIA IN COMBATTING
TERRORISM
A Multi-dimensional Response
The Commission in its Report on (Public Order' had emphasized the important role
played by the civil society, media and political parties in maintaining public order. A
multidimensional response to combat terrorism would require well coordinated action on
all fronts and each of these agencies/institutions has an important role to play.
Education
NCERT has proposed a scheme to encourage and support institutions, voluntary agencies
and NGOs etc. engaged with school education for promotion of Education for Peace

Combatting Terrorism: Protecting by Righteousness
within the country. These initiatives need to be encouraged with necessary funds and other
material support.
The response to the phenomenon of Jehadi terrorism being advocated in some madrassas
needs to be countered by emphasising on the true essence of Islam. Educational Institutions
like madrass as well as other social institutions could playa major role in this regard. In
fact, it is important to have a holistic strategy for promotion of Education for Peace,
covering secular as well as religious schools. As far as the secular schools are concerned, the
National Curriculum Framework, 2005, brought out by National Steering Committee
of the NCERT has already suggested a course of action. The feasibility of extending this
scheme to religious schools could also be considered.
Media
Media policy should include principles of self restraint. Publishers, editors and reporters
need to be sensitized to avoid and exclude those elements of media coverage that may
unwittingly advance the agenda of terrorists. All forms of media should be encouraged
to evolve a self regulating code of conduct to ensure that publicity arising out of terrorist
attacks does not help the terrorist with their nefarious intentions.
The administration needs the support of the media and information professionals who are
schooled and steeped in media values and have acceptance in today's highly competitive
media world. At present, the availability of professional media officers is limited particularly
at the field levels. This shortage of media professionals in the administration should be
addressed.
An informed and engaged media that is not restricted, manipulated or overly regulated
can better appreciate the imperatives of the administration in its fight against terrorism.
Thereby, the administration would also increase its preparedness and effectiveness in dealing
with crisis and develop more appropriate media-oriented responses. Greater transparency
would make the media a purposeful partner in the larger cause of the fight against terrorism.
Transparency can win over the media as an asset and an ally. The potential of media in
spreading education and awareness needs to be tapped to build the capacity of citizens in
dealing with any public disorder and particularly terrorist violence.

SOCIAL CAPITAL
- A Shared Destiny
Introduction
'Social Capital' as a concept, received entry in social science literature in the 1980s. Soon
it assumed an economic connotation and came to be accepted as a factor of production in
the development theory. It refers to those institutions, relationships, and norms that shape
the quality and quantity of a society's interaction. It consists of trust, mutual understanding,
shared values and behaviour that bind together the members of a community and make
cooperative action possible. The basic premise is that such interaction enables people to
build communities, to commit themselves to each other, and to knit the social fabric. A
sense of belonging and the concrete experience of social networking (and the relationships
of trust and tolerance that evolve) can bring great benefits to people.
Social capital now stands accepted as a necessary element of development theory. In many
cases it provides a cogent explanation for the failure of economic policies. The notion that
a set of macro-economic policies supported by appropriate institutions would necessarily
transform an economy often does not work in actual practice. Policies and institutions
operate in an ensemble which is strongly conditioned by sociological parameters.
Social capital organisations are supposed to play four crucial roles in society:
• The Service Role
• The Value Guardian Role
• The Advocacy/Social Safety-Valve Role
• The Community Building Role
There are several ways in which social capital can improve government performance. First,
it can broaden government accountability; government must be responsive to citizens at
large rather than to narrow sectarian interests. Secondly, it can facilitate agreement where
political preferences are polarized. Thirdly, it induces innovation in policymaking. Finally,
it enhances the efficiency of delivery of many services at the local level through involvement
of residents.

Social Capital - A Shared Destiny
EVOLUTION AND GROWTH
Social Capital Organisations and India's Constitution
The Indian Constitution provides a distinct legal space to social capital / civil society
institutions (a) through its Article on the right to form associations or unions - Article 19 (1)
(c); (b) through Article 43 which talks of States making endeavour to promote cooperatives
in rural areas; and (c) through explicit mention in entries made in Schedule 7.
The State list - Entry 32 - "Incorporation, regulation and winding up of corporations, other
than those specified in List I, and universities; unincorporated trading, literary, scientific,
religious and other societies and associations; co-operative societies".
The Union list - Entry 43 - "Incorporation, regulation and winding up of trading
corporations, including banking, insurance and financial corporations but not including
co-operative societies".
Entry 44 - "Incorporation, regulation and winding up of corporations, whether trading
or not, with objects not confined to one State, but not including universities". Concurrent
a -
List - Entry 1 "Trusts and Trustees".
Entry 28 - "Charities and charitable institutions, charitable and religious endowments and
religious institutions".
Since forming Associations is a Constitutional right under Article 19(1)(c) of the Indian
Constitution, it is quite feasible to set up a non-profit/voluntary organisation without any
kind of registration or recognition under any of the entries mentioned above. In fact, some
of the community based organisations like village committees, small religious groups and
many Resident Welfare Associations function in this manner. However, when it comes to
claiming exemptions under the Income Tax Act and for availing of other benefits from the
Government, there is insistence on formal registration.
Government Policy
The Union Government in its National Policy on the "Voluntary Sector" (formulated by the
Planning Commission and approved by the Union Cabinet in May, 2007) stipulates that
"Voluntary Organisations (VOs) mean to include organisations engaged in public service,
based on ethical, cultural, social, economic, political, religious, spiritual, philanthropic or
scientific and technological considerations. VOs include formal as well as informal groups,
such as: Community-Based Organisations (CBOs); Non-Governmental Development

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Organisations (NGDOs); charitable organisations; support organisations; networks or
federations of such organisations; as well as Professional Membership Associations".
Voluntary Sector - Its Classification
Based on the law under which they operate and the kind of activities they take up, civil
society groups in our country can be classified into following broad categories:-
(a) Registered Societies formed for specific purposes
(b) Charitable 9rganisations and Trust~
(c) Local Stakeholders Groups, Microcredit and Thrift Enterprises, SHGs
(d) Professional Self-Regulatory Bodies
(e) Cooperatives
(f) Bodies wi~out having any formal organisational structure
(g) Government promoted Third Sector Organisations
SOCIETIES, TRUSTS I CHAR1TABLE INSTITUTIONS, WAQFS AND
ENDOWMENTS
Legal and Institutional Framework
Legal Context
The law concerning Societies, Trusts, Waqfs and other endowments in India can be placed
in three broad groupings:
(i) Societies registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 and various
States amendments on it after 1947;
(ii) Those engaged in pure religious and charitable work registered under the
Religious Endowments Act, 1863; the Charitable and Religious Trusts Act,
1920; the Waqf Act, 1995 and similar other State Acts;
(iii) Trusts and charitable institutions registered under the Indian Trusts Act, 1882;
Charitable Endowments Act, 1890; the Bombay Public Trusts Act, 1950; and
similar other State Acts.

Social Capital - A Shared Destiny
Need for a New Legal Framework for Charities in India
The multiplicity of charity laws in India has prevented evolution and growth of a proper
institutional framework in this sector. While, voluntary organisations often feel harassed
in complying with various legal obligations, institutions of the government too have not
been effective in regulating the sector and securing legal compliance. Instances of misuse
of tax: provisions, fraud and poor governance have become frequent. There is need to create
an effective institutional mechanism which would provide a supportive environment for
the growth and development of charities in this country. India being a federal Union,
a decentralized institutional setup for charities seems to be appropriate. The power of
registration and oversight needs to lie with the State Governments.
A Model law for Societies and Trusts
Non-Profit / Voluntary Organisations in our country operate on a wide variety of issues
covering almost all aspects of socio-economic development and polity. There are separate
laws under which Societies, Trusts, charitable institutions, religious endowments and Waqf
etc. can be set up.
Diversity of laws across the States has given rise to emergence of non-uniform practices
in the management of voluntary organisations. If an institution registered in one State
desires to expand its activities to any other area, it needs to comply with a different set of
legal requirements. The Commission is of the view that the management of civil SO,citrty
organisations will be far less complicated if a uniform legal regime for regulation of charity
institutions is put in place for the entire country. Currently, 'Societies' is a subject under
the State list of the Constitution, whereas 'Trust' is in the Concurrent list (Entry 10).
"Charities and charitable institutions" are also covered under the concurrent list (Entry
28). In order to create a uniform legal environment across States, the Commission suggests
that the Union Government should formulate a comprehensive model law covering both
Societies as well as Trusts. This model law could be sent to the States who could adopt it
with suitable modifications.
Key Elements oft he New Law
The following three key elements would need to be explained in the proposed law:
(i) Defining Charity and Charitable Purpose
(ii) Institutional Mechanism

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
(iii) Interface with the State Government
(i) Defining Charity and Charitable Purpose
The new law will need to draft a composite definition based on the contents of the original
Societies Registration Act, 1860, various amended State Acts, the Bombay Public Trusts Act,
1950, Section 92 of the Civil Procedure Code and Section 2(15) of the Income Tax Act,
1961. The Commission is of the view that there is need to set up an Inclusive Committee
which will examine this issue comprehensively and suggest an appropriate definition which
would inter-alia soften charities-government relationship, particularly in tax matters.
(ii) Institutional Mechanism
In place of the present charity administration consisting of a Charity Commissioner /
Inspector General of Registrations as existing in the States, the proposed law would provide
for a new governance structure in the form of a three-member Charities Commission in
each State. It will be an autonomous Body created by law. It will have laid down functions
and responsibilities and will be accountable to the State assembly through a nodal Minister.
The Chairman of the Commission should be a law officer drawn from the cadre of District
Judges. Out of the other two members, one should be drawn from the voluntary sector and
the other should be an officer of the State Government. The functions of this Commission
would be to regulate and support the sector. The law would also provide for creation of a
Charities Tribunal in each State which will have appellate jurisdiction over the orders of
the Charities Commission.
(iii) Interface with the State Government
At present, a non-profit organisation's interaction with the State authorities consists of
the following - (a) Government's power with regard to grant of permission for alteration
of the memorandum, alienation of property or inclusion of the change report; (b)
Government's powers of inspection; (c) Powers to cancel registration; (d) Powers to
appoint an administrator; (e) Powers to modify / annul a decision of the Governing Body;
(f) Powers to disso~ve the institution; and (g) Powers to impose penalty. There is a feeling
among the NPOs that the sector has virtually become a subordinate formation of the State
Government. The NPO sector should have freedom in their functioning. Government's·
interface with these organisations should be minimal and the government should work
only as a facilitator and developer.
The discretionary powers acquired by various State Governments during the course of time
need to be dispensed with.

Social Capital - A Shared Destiny
In addition to the above, the proposed law will need to take care of the following important
functional issues which are critical to a voluntary organisation's working:
(a) Alteration in the memorandum - The proposed legislation should provide
that a special resolution is passed by a majority of not less than 3/5th of the
total members of the Society present at the meeting. It would be in line with
the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956, where a special resolution can be
passed by 3/4th of the shareholders present at the meeting.
(b) Approval on change report - The process needs to be simplified and made time
bound. The proposed new legislation should have a provision under which
the approval on change report would need to be given within a prescribed
reasonable time limit (say 60 days).
(c) Alienation of immovable property - In the new enactment the Authority must
have reasonable opportunity to critically examine such proposals in order to
check misuse. At the same time, there is need to make the disposal of such
matters time bound.
(d) Contribution by Public Trusts to the State Government - Currently, Trusts
have to pay 20/0 to 50/0 of their gross revenue to the State Government under
this clause. For many of the organisations, this amount appears to be excessive.
There is need to have a relook at this issue.
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR)
The Commission acknowledges that over the years, many of the Corporate houses have
undertaken significant work in sectors like primary/adult education, livestock development,
tank irrigation, sanitation, women and child nutrition and provision of drinking water.
The Commission feels that while taking up such activities, the Corporates should take into
account the prevailing needs of the local people. It also needs to be ensured that ,there is
no overlap/clash with other similar programmes in the area.
Government Funding
Both the Union and State Governments provide considerable budgetary support to voluntary
organisations on a wide range of activities like rural technology, concerns of social welfare,
primary education, maternal and child health care, adult education, empowerment ofw omen
and rehabilitation of the disabled. Apart from making direct disbursement of grants to

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
voluntary agencies, Government of India has also set up especially empowered Autonomous
Bodies to provide support to the activities of the Third Sector Organisations (TSOs).
Accreditation ofV oluntary Organisations
Accreditation is a formal recognition of the achievements of an organisation, linked to
some internal / external norms such as commitment to long term aims and objectives,
organisational ability, adherence to financial norms, transparency and accountability etc.
A large number of voluntary organisations receive grants from government for a variety of
purposes such as social and welfare services, surveys, studies, monitoring, evaluation etc.
These organisations vary greatly in their capability and credibility. In the absence of any
system of accreditation / certification, the government agency at both Union and State
level have found it extremely difficult to distinguish between organisations who value
for quality and those which have been set up almost solely for the purpose of receiving
government grants.
The Commission has carefully considered the whole issue and agrees with the view that:
(a) Accountability to stakeholders and transparency in the functioning of the
voluntary sector is essential; therefore, there is a need for accreditation ofVOs
through an independent agency like the National Accreditation Council. This
Body could be set up by law.
(b) Accreditation does not amount to ranking or rating of VOs. It is a stamp of
transparency, accountability and credibility.
(c) To start with, the government needs to place an appropriate corpus of fund
at the disposal of the NAC, which could be supplemented by donations.
Thereafter, the Council could finance its activities by charging fees from its
clients. Such system of accreditation/ certification should be applicable only to
those organisations which seek funding from government agencies. In order
that the parameters adopted are clear and transparent and the actions taken
by NAC are independent, it is advisable that the constitution of the Council,
its functions and procedures are clearly spelt out in the law.
Charitable Organisations and Tax Laws
The Income Tax Act, 1961 is a Union legislation, which applies to all voluntary organisations
(Trust, Society or Company) uniformly throughout India. Any voluntary (non-profit)

Social Capital-A Shared Destiny
organisation engaged in a charitable work, defined as "relief for the poor, education, medical
relief, and the advancement of any objects of general public utility not involving any activity
for profit", can claim tax exemptions and other benefits under the Income Tax Act, 1961
subject to the conditions and restrictions contained therein.
Broadly, the Income Tax Act provides benefits to charitable organisations in the following
three ways:
1. Certain incomes are not included in the total income
II. Deductions to be allowed from the profit and gains of business and
profession
III. Deductions to be made in computing total income for the purposes of
calculating tax liability on the total income
There are four areas of interface between voluntary organisations and the Income Tax Act.
First is getting the exemption approved by the prescribed authority under Section 10(23C)
of the Income Tax Act. Second is the process of getting registered as a charitable institution
under Sections 12A and 12AA (in order to claim benefits under Sections 11 and 12). Third
is getting SOG exemption certificate status. And fourth is claiming deductions under Sections
35, 35 AC, and 35 CCA.
Simplification ofP rocedure under Section 12AA and Section BOG
The Commission recognizes the need for simplifying the administrative procedure. To
reduce the time taken for granting registration to organisations under Sections SOG and
12AA, the order giving approval or rejecting the application under these sections could be
passed within a time limit of ninety days by the prescribed authority. In case of rejection,
the assessee has the option to go in appeal before the Appellate Tribunal, against an order
passed by the Commissioner under Section 12AA,and Section SOG of the Income Tax
Act, 1961.
Extending Time Limit for Accumulation ofS urplus Income
Under the existing provisions, surplus income can be accumulated for a maximum period
of five years for specific projects.
In modern times, buildings and infrastructure are critical components of a charity's
functioning (hospitals, old age homes/orphanages, educational institutions etc.). Therefore,
the period of accumulation needs to be enhanced.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Rationalisation ofP rocedure under Section 35A C
With regard to Section 35AC of the Income Tax Act a deduction on expenditure is allowed
ifit is recommended by the National Committee to the Ministry of Finance. This is a time
consuming process especially for organisations situated in far off areas
Exemptions sought under this provision of the law could be expedited if the National
Committee is replaced by four Regional National Committees to be located in Delhi,
Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata.
Regulation of Foreign Contribution
Legal Framework
The Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, (FCRA) 1976 has the primary objective of
regulating the acceptance and utilisation of foreign contribution or foreign hospitality by
certain persons or associations, with a view to ensuring that Parliamentary and political
associations, academic and other institutions as well as individuals working in important
areas of national life may function in a manner consistent with the values of a sovereign
democratic republic. The Act prohibits acceptance of foreign contribution by election
candidates, journalists, public servants, members of the legislature, and political parties or
their office bearers, and allows Associations having definite cultural, economic, educational
religious or social programme to accept such contributions after complying with certain
req uiremen ts.
The requirements are: (i) that the Association shall register itselfwith the Union Government
in accordance with the Act; (ii) shall agree to receive such foreign contribution only through
a particular branch of a Bank as specified in the application for registration, and (iii) shall
give an intimation to the Union Government as to the amount of each foreign contribution
received, the source from which it was received, and the manner in which such foreign
contributions was utilized.
The Union Government may, under certain circumstances, require organisations to obtain
its prior permission before accepting any foreign contribution gives a lot of subjective powers
to the authorities. The process of inquiry involving verification by intelligence agencies
leaves considerable scope for misuse of powers, delay and harassment.
The Union Government has introduced a new Bill called The Foreign Contribution
(Regulation) Bill, 2006 on 18th December, 2006 to replace the existing Foreign
Contribution (Regulation) Act, 1976.

Social Capital-A Shared Destiny
The Bill has become a subject ofintense debate and is being perceived as an intrusive piece of
legislation which intends to place charities, receiving foreign donation under the subjective
scrutiny of the authorities.
Reform ofR egistration Procedure
In the context of development of social capital, the primary concern with regard to receipt
of foreign contributions should be to ensure that genuine organisations are not harassed
or their functioning impeded by byzantine procedures and red tapism.
The Commission is of the view that the process of registration under the proposed law on
foreign contribution needs to be kept simple and there is a need to fix a time limit for issue
of registration certificate / prior approval by the competent authority.
At the same time, a large number of voluntary organisations are receiving donations from
foreign sources and it is quite possible that at times the funds could be used for purposes
which could adversely affect national interest. Creating an effective monitoring system to
track such funds becomes necessary. The Commission is of the view that there is a need
to maintain a fine balance between 'national interest' on one side and free functioning of
the voluntary sector on the other. To that extent, there is need to clarify and amend the
proposed Bill and clear the misgivings which are agitating the voluntary sector.
The changes required in the proposed Bill to provide such a balance are discussed below:
An organisation which intends receiving foreign donation will need to be registered
or required to seek prior approval under Section 11 of the FCR Bill, 2006. Even after
registration, it is mandatory to furnish returns and details.
The Bill prescribes no time limit for the procedure. This is far more stringent than the existing
provisions which provided an outer time limit of ninety days. There is a deemed clause
as well. Having such an open-ended law may lead to delay and harassment. In a similar
provision under the Income Tax Act (Section 12AA) too, which deals with registration of
charitable institutions, there is a time limit of six months. There, it has been recommended
that the period of six months should be further reduced to ninety days.
The FCR Bill, 2006 goes much beyond the existing Act and tends (i) to prohibit receipt
of foreign contribution by certain Class of individuals or organisations; and (ii) to regulate
foreign contribution received by voluntary organisations. It places extensive emphasis on
national interest and issues such as not taking up meaningful activity; or not preparing
a meaningful project; have been placed under the domain of the proposed law. The

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Commission feels that the term "national interest" or other requirements, if not defined
properly, could lead to a wide subjective interpretation and create unnecessary difficulties
for bona fide voluntary organisations.
Rationalisation ofP rocedures
The procedure for grant of a registration certificate under the FCR Act is long and
cumbersome and causes harassment to applicants. Scrutiny of the returns filed subsequently
by organisations is reported to be perfunctory. As a result, the FCR Act is not meeting the
objectives for which it was enacted.
Often, cases are selected by the FCRA Division of the Home Ministry for inter-agency
consultation. In the absence of transparent rules / guidelines with regard to the procedure
to be adopted for such consultations, the inter-agency reference leaves considerable scope
for harassment, delay and corruption. Provisions of the Act need further elaboration
with regard to (a) the minimum amount of donation which would require inter-agency
consultation, (b) the level of the Authority which would authorize it, and (c) setting up
time limits for such procedures.
Currently, the entire work under the FCRA is being handled by a Division of the Home
Ministry headquartered at New Delhi. The State Government and its machinery particularly
the District Administration which are in a position to observe and monitor the activities
of the NGOs in their areas are not involved in the process. If some of the functions under
FCRA are decentralized and delegated to the State Government/ District Administration,
it will help in (a) speedy disposal of registration petitions, (b) close monitoring of their
activities, and (c) scrutiny of returns.
Moreover, many organisations are in receipt of meagre funds but they have to undergo
full compliance requirements under the provisions ofFCRA, 1976. A threshold limit with
regard to the amount of foreign contribution received in a year by a voluntary organisation
needs to be fixed. Organisations receiving contribution below this limit in a year would
be exempted from. registration and other provisions of this law. At the end of the year,
these organisations could simply file an annual intimation with the appropriate authority:
indicating the details of the amount of foreign contribution received and utilized by them
during the period. If the authority has reasons to believe that the declarant has suppressed
or misstated certain facts with the deliberate intention of remaining within the threshold
limit, activities of such an organisation can be probed further. Such a threshold at present
could be fixed at Rs. 10 lakh. This figure could be revised from time to time.

Social Capital - A Shared Destiny
THIRD SECTOR ORGANISATIONS AT THE LOCAL LEVEL - SELF-HELP
GROUPS
General
Self-Help Groups are informal associations of people who choose to come together to
find ways to improve their living conditions. They help to build Social Capital among the
poor, especially women. The most important functions of a Self-Help Groups are (a) to
encourage and motivate its members to save, (b) to persuade them to make a collective
plan for generation of additional income, and (c) to act as a conduit for formal banking
services to reach them. Such groups work as a collective guarantee system for members who
propose to borrow from organised sources. Consequently, Self-Help Groups have emerged
as the most effective mechanism for delivery of micro-finance services to the poor. The
range of financial services may include products such as deposits, loans, money transfer
and insurance.
Financial Inclusion - Current Status in the Country
One of the reasons for rural poverty in our country is low access to credit and financial
services. As per a survey report of the NSSO, 45.9 million farmer households in the country
0
(51.4/0) out of a total of 89.3 million households do not have access to any form of credit
from institutional or non-institutional sources. Overall, 730/0 of the households do not have
credit links with any financial institution. This apart, the overall credit linkage portfolio
when taken as a whole for the country, appears to be highly skewed with the North-Eastern,
Eastern and Central regions lagging far behind other parts of the country.
Rashtriya Mahila Kosh (RMK)
The Commission is of the view that it is difficult for a small Delhi based organisation like
RMK to function effectively and monitor projects spread over the entire country. The corpus
of the Kosh should be enhanced substantially so that the coverage of its programmes goes
up. The Kosh should be allowed to open regional offices with adequate staff at selected
places in the country. Since the States of the North-East, Bihar, Up, Orissa, Jharkhand,
Uttarakhand, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and Rajasthan have been identified as credit
deficient, the Kosh may be given a special mandate that the focus of its activities will be in
these areas for a period of next five years.
Issues ofSHG Movement
Though, during a short span of fifteen years the SHG movement has recorded remarkable
progress (29.24 lakhs SHGs in operation on 31.03.2007 with a cumulative loan of

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
180,407,42 millions), much still remains to be done. Even if we consider only the BPL
population of the country (24.20/0 -26 crores), the above achievement seems to be minuscule.
The movement shows steep territorial variations. Many areas of the country lack adequate
banking infrastructure. Urban and semi-urban areas, to a large extent, stand excluded from
this mode of credit delivery. Further growth of this movement faces threat from inadequacy
of skills in the rural areas. And finally the pace of the movement needs to be accelerated.
The Commission has considered the strengths and weaknesses of this movement and it
feels that the following eight issues in this sector deserve priority attention:
• Maintaining the participatory character
• Need to expand the SHG movement to States such as Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya
Pradesh, Orissa, Rajasthan and in the North-East (where the SHG movement
and micro-finance entreprenuership is weak)
• Need to extend small group organisations (SHGs) to peri-urban and urban
areas
• Mode of SHG development and financial intermediation
• Self-Help Groups and Regional Rural Banks
• Issues of sustainability
• Financial assistance to Self Help Promoting Institutions (SHPIs) and other support
institutions
• Role of Micro-Finance Institutions
Maintaining the Participatory Character olSHGs
The strength of a Self-Help Group lies primarily in its solidarity-based participatory character,
and in its ability to survive without any significant external support or involvement. In the
early phases of its existence, the intent behind the cooperative movement too focused on
stakeholders' participation. But gradually these primary institutions became subordinate to
Cooperative Banks, Apex Unions, and Marketing Federations. Though the SHG movement
is relatively new, government interventions and subsidies have already started showing
negative results. The patronage and subsidies provided to the SHGs by government and
the Panchayats often lead to their politicization.
There is need to learn from the experience of the cooperative sector. The mutually

Social Capital - A Shared Destiny
participatory, solidarity-based character of the SHG movement needs to be retained and
protected. The SHG movement should be recognized as a people's movement and the role
of government should be to facilitate and create a supportive environment, rather than
'manage' the movement directly.
Expanding SHG Movement to Credit Deficient Areas oft he Country
The States which are particularly deficient in this respect are Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya
Pradesh, Orissa, Rajasthan and those in the North-East. NABARD itself has identified 13
States which have large rural population but are performing unsatisfactorily in utilization
of Micro Finance Development and Equity Fund (MFDEF). Currently, the Bank has 28
regional offices which are located at the State headquarters, but its presence at the district
level is skewed with only 391 branches in the whole country. The density of such offices in
Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Bihar, Jharkhand, West Bengal and Assam is inadequate.
The pace of SHG movement needs to be accelerated in the credit deficient areas of the
country such as - Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Bihar, Jharkhand, Orissa, West Bengal and
States of the North-East. This is possible only by rapid expansion of financial infrastructure
(including of NABARD) and by adopting extensive IEC and capacity building measures
in these States.
Extension ofS elf-Help Groups to Urban / Peri-Urban Areas
Migrants to urban areas do not have access to organised financial services. As per the
existing statutory provisions, NABARD's mandate is to provide micro-finance facilities only
to rural and semi-urban areas. Branches of the mainstream Banks too, though, equipped
with manpower and technology, are not keen to service this sector. Even money lenders are
reluctant to lend to them. The net result is that this segment of the urban population e.g.
pavement sellers, street hawkers, construction workers etc. remains financially excluded.
This issue has also been considered by the Committee on Financial Inclusion headed by
Dr. C. Rangarajan. In the current scenario of ever increasing urbanization (27.80/0 in 2001,
likely to be 50% by 2040), for a holistic development of urban areas, all round efforts should
be made to increase income generation abilities of the urban poor. The Commission agrees
with the recommendations of the Rangarajan Committee that there is need to organize
this class of people into Neighbourhood Groups (NHGs) on the same pattern as has been
adopted for the rural poor. Since NABARD has the necessary expertise in this sector, it
would be best ifit plays a promotional role for Self-Help Groups and micro-finance activities
in urban / peri-urban areas too.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Mode ofS HG Development and Financial Intermediation
Establishing stable linkage between a SHG and a local financial institution is one of the key
elements of the SH G movement. Currently, four distinct models of financial intermediation
are in operation in various parts of the country namely;
1. SHG-Bank linkage promoted by a mentor institute
2. SHG-Bank direct linkage
3. SHG-Mentor Institution linkage; and
4. SHG-Federation model
Since the borrowing SHGs consist mainly of low income members who cannot afford to
miss even a day's wages, a hassle-free transaction with a Bank which is ready to come to
their doorsteps with appropriate credit products is of great value to them. The SHG - Bank
Linkage Model with a mentor SHPI in tow (Model I above) would be the most appropriate
one for delivery of financial services to the SHGs.
Innovation: Innovation is critical for financial inclusion. This would mean developing newer
financial products in terms of loans, savings, insurance services etc. which are tailored to
the needs of the poor. Currently, most public sector Banks and micro-finance institutions
have a narrow product offering, which limits the choice of the SHGs and also constrains
them in terms of utilizing the loans productively.
Self-Help Groups and Regional Rural Banks (RRBs)
As on 1st April, 2007, out of a total of 622 districts in the country, 535 have a network of
Regional Rural Banks; the other 87 districts have no RRB presence. Extension of the RRB
network to the remaining 87 districts would considerably speed up the process of inclusive
banking and help in extending micro finance to local SHGs.
Issues ofS ustainability, Capacity Building and use of Technology
Capacity building of small groups / members is an important component of organisational
effectiveness. Capacity building of government functionaries and Bank personnel is a
necessary element of an equitable triangular relationship involving the SHGs, government
functionaries and the local Banks and there is a positive correlation between the training
received by government functionaries/Bank personnel and their overall attitude towards

Social Capital - A Shared Destiny
local organisations. For success of such cooperative / social capital ventures, there is need
to provide extensive training to all the three pillars of the self-help movement.
Financial Assistance to SHPIs and other Support Institutions
If the SHG movement is to spread across the entire country, there is need to provide major
incentives to SHPIs / promoter NGOs. Currently, the financial support to SHPIs comes
from the Micro Finance Development and Equity Fund (MFDEF) of NABARD. It is
limited to an amount of Rs.1500 per SHG (formed and activated). To attract more and
more SHPIs to the rural areas, this quantum of support needs to be revised.
Role ofM icro Finance Institutions (MFIs)
Organizing thrift and savings and leveraging it to obtain funds without formal collaterals
are the two most important activities of the SHGs. Since large commercial Banks, due to
their complex operational structure and other management constraints, are usually not
. able to meet the needs of this sector, a large number of private micro-finance institutions
have been set up in recent years in various parts of the country to fill this void. Certain
important issues relating to the activities of the MFIs in the country have been examined
in the succeeding paragraphs.
Micro-credit is defined as provision of thrift, credit, and other financial services (such as
deposits, loans, payment services, money transfer, insurance and related products) of very
small amounts to the poor in rural, semi-urban and urban areas for enabling them to raise
their income levels and improve living standards. Micro-finance institutions are those which
provide such micro-credit facilities. Leaving aside the commercial Banks, the needs of this
sector are currently being handled by the following four major players:
• Rural Banks
• Cooperatives
• Institutions which have been registered as Societies, Public Trusts, and Section 25
Compa~ies or as NBFCs to take up the work of micro-finance on operational/
financial sustainability
• Individual money-lenders.
Micro-Finance Institutions in the Formal Sector
Currently, a major share of the micro-financial services such as handling thrift and providing
credit to the economically active low-income segments of society, especially women, poor

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
households and their micro enterprises is being collectively handled by public sector
institutions like NABARD, Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI), Rashtriya
Mahila Kosh, rural branches of Commercial Banks and Regional Rural Banks (RRBs).
MFIs and Money-lenders' Act
An issue which has become the subject of intense debate, concerns the rate of interest
and recovery practices of MFIs. Currently, there are 22 States in the country which have
Money-lenders' Act in place. Some States have gone a step further and also enacted a new
legislation called Prohibition of Charging Exorbitant Interest Act. In several cases, they
have applied the provisions of these two Acts on activities of the MFIs and forced them to
stop their business.
The scope and activities of MFIs need to be clarified vis-a-vis the Money-lenders' and
Prohibition of Charging Exorbitant Interest Acts as prevalent in various States. There is
need to further look into the issues of MFI - State Money-lending legislations interface
and take all categories of MFIs; Societies, Public Trusts, Cooperative Societies, Section 25
Companies and NBFCs out of the purview of these laws. The Commission also feels that
the issue of interest rate charged by the MFIs should be left to the Regulatory Authority
which is being p~oposed under the Micro-Financial Sector (Development and Regulation)
Bill 2007.
Micro-Financial Sector (Development and Regulation) Bill, 2007
At present, except for those registered as NBFCs, the lending activities of MFIs are not
being covered by any Regulation. In order to regulate this sector, the Union Government
introduced 'the Micro Financial Sector (Development and Regulation) Bill, 2001' in Lok
Sabha on 20th March, 2007.
The proposed Bill has generated fierce debate among stakeholders and civil society
organisations.
With the emergence of new forms of social capital institutions viz. SHGs / other Joint
Liability Formations, a large space has been created in the rural economy for microfinance
institutions. There is need to have a comprehensive legislation for promotion, development
and orderly growth of the micro-finance sector in the country. It would cover a whole range
of products needed by the poor such as micro credit, savings, insurance and money transfer.
The Commission has also considered the views of various stakeholders on the proposed Bill.
While agreeing with some of the concerns expressed in this regard, the Commission is of
the view that since NABARD has been supervising RRBs and Cooperative Banks for the

Social Capital-A Shared Destiny
past twenty five years and has acquired adequate expertise in development of micro-credit,
it can be given the task of supervising and regulating MFIs as proposed in the Bill. The
Commission has also taken note of the fact that NABARD provides only refinance facility
to primary lenders and does not lend directly. It is primarily a facilitator and not a service
provider. There appears to be no scope of conflict between the supervisory and regulatory
functions of NABARD.
As far as the question of allowing MFIs to handle thrift / saving and money transfer is
concerned, the Commission would like to adopt a path of caution. Since it will involve
hard earned savings of the poorest of the society, MFIs should be allowed to accept savings
only as business correspondents of Scheduled Banks and not in their individual capacity
as a micro-finance lender.
Hence, the Micro Financial Sector (Development and Regulation) Bill, 2007 needs to be
. reconsidered on the following lines:
• The scope of micro-finance services should be substantially widened to cover
credit / savings, insurance, pension services, money transfer, issue / discount of
warehouse receipts and future / option contracts for agricultural commodities and
forest produce.
• NBFCs are already regulated by the RBI. However, Nidhis registered under Section
620A of the Companies Act, and Producer Companies should also be brought
under the new legislation.
• The activities of Section 25 Companies to the extent they concern microfinancial
services as described under the proposed Bill also need to be brought under purview
of this legislation. However, for their management and other functions, they will
continue to be governed by the provisions of the Companies Act.
• Savings, in general, is a low cost source for onward lending. But there is need to
protect the savings of the poor people. Steps should be taken to ensure that ifMFIs
are allowed to handle thrift / savings and money transfer services, they would do
so only as business correspondents of Commercial Banks.
SELF-REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
Introduction
Currently, there are six major professional Bodies operating in India, each having been
formed under a specific law.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
• Bar Council of India (BCI) - formed under the Advocates Act, 1961
• Medical Council of India (MCI) - formed under the Indian Medical Council
Act, 1956
• Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) - formed under the Chartered
Accountants Act, 1949
• Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India (ICWAI) - formed under the
Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959
• Institute of Company Secretaries of India (I CSI) - formed under the Company
Secretaries Act, 1980
• Council of Architecture (COA) - formed under the Architects Act, 1972
Trust between Professionals and Citizens
Formed with enthusiasm and vision, the Regulatory Authorities worked with zeal and
interest in the initial years of their existence. The level of professional competence and
conduct was adequately high in the early years of Independence and by and large, the medical
profession, engineers, lawyers and others conducted themselves with great responsibility
and professionalism. But in recent years, the drift in almost all professions towards self
interest has become markedly pronounced. The general perception is that instead of being
self-regulatory, Regulatory Bodies have become "self-promoting lobbies."
Separating Professional Education from Self-Regulatory Authorities
Currently, one of the major tasks of Self-Regulatory Authorities is to manage and regulate
professional education. The National Knowledge Commission (NKC) which was constituted in
2005 has gone into issues ofh igher education in the country. One ofi ts major recommendations
is that professional education should be taken away from the domain oft he existing Regulatory
Bodies and an Independent Regulatory Authority for Higher Education established by law.
The subject of legal education was discussed in detail by the Law Commission of India
in its 184th Report. The Law Commission had discussed the suggestion to form an All
India Legal Education Council on the model ofA ll India Council for Technical Education
(AI CTE). In the new dispensation, the BCI would be responsible only for regulating entry
into the profession and maintenance of standards.
The main argument behind the recommendations of the National Knowledge Commission
is that in the current era, the curriculum of a particular stream does not cater only to the

Social Capital - A Shared Destiny
traditional sector of the profession, but also meets the needs of other competence areas. For
example, our law colleges / institutes do not prepare students only for careers in the Bar or
in the judiciary. The curriculum also trains them for other equally important functions in
society such as those of policy makers, business advisers, academicians, activists and public
officials. The expansion of trade and commerce and the resulting environment of global
integration have brought into the picture a variety of complex commercial issues which
require ability and knowledge of the highest calibre.
Medical education too is a field in which the standard of research and knowledge has reached
a high level. Designing curriculum, setting standards and managing research has become
an area of high scientific pursuit which can be managed only by people of excellence.
The current system of elections discourages the entry of high calibre individuals into the
Professional Bodies. There seems to be strong merit in the argument that a separate Body
dominated largely by persons with specialized knowledge in their respective field should
be put in charge of medical education.
In view of the above, the Commission agrees with the stand of the National Knowledge
Commission that the subject of professional education should be separated from the domain
of the existing Regulators. However, it is felt that creating a high powered monolith at the
national level in overall command of all the streams of professional education, will go against
the very principle of decentralisation. Secondly, the NKC has proposed to create separate
Standing Committees in lRAHE to look after different streams, one each for law, medicine,
management, chartered accountancy, pharmacy, nursing etc. They will be doing the same
work as is currently being done by BCl, MCI, AICTE and others (planning, formulation
and maintenance of norms and standards, quality assurance through accreditation, funding
in priority areas, monitoring and evaluation, maintaining parity of certification / awards.
and ensuring coordinated and integrated development and management of the stream).
The Commission believes that the interests of higher education will be better served, if
instead of creating one monolithic body, separate institutions are created for each of the
professional field of study (medicine, law, management, technology etc.).
The apex regulatory agencies - one for each of the professional education streams - should
be created by law. They could be called the National Standards and Quality Council for
Law, National Standards and Quality Council for Medicine, National Standards and Quality
Council for Management and so on. It needs to be ensured that there is uniformity in their
composition and structure. The Commission is also of the view that these Councils need not
act as Regulators in the classical sense as they will have no licensing functions. They should
be entrusted only with the task of laying down norms, standards and parameters for (a)
setting up new institutions, (b) designing / updating curriculum, (c) faculty improvement,

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
(d) carrying out research / innovation, and (e) other key issues concerning the stream.
While constituting these Councils, the law should take into consideration the following
guiding principles:
(1) Such Councils should have full autonomy.
(2) The highest policy and decision making Body of these Councils should have a
majority of independent members, and preferably no more than 2 or 3 drawn
. from government, who could be there in ex-officio capacity.
(3) These Councils should have a strong and effective grievance redressal
mechanism.
(4) The Councils should be accountable to Parliament and their Reports, should
be placed before the House annually. In addition, there should be strong norms
for suo-motu disclosures under the RTI Act.
(5) One important function of these Councils will concern accreditation /
certification of institutions falling under their jurisdiction. Hence, each of
these National Councils should have a body of experts to advise it on these
matters.
(6) Some of the members of such Councils can be elected from among office bearers
of speciality Associations (e.g. Indian Medical Association), as these members
are elected by the practicing professionals in their individual specialty.
With the enactment of a new law as proposed above and creation of separate National
Standards and Quality Councils for technology and management, the AICTE will need
to be abolished.
There is need to introduce substantial reforms in the higher education sector particularly
with regard to - number and size of the Universities, curriculum, assessment, research,
faculty, finances, infrastructure and governance. The National Knowledge Commission
has made important recommendations in this regard which should be examined by the
government and implemented on priority. The Commission would like to particularly
highlight and endorse the recommendation of the NKC regarding appointment of Vice
Chancellors. The process of appointment should be free from direct or indirect interference
of the government. Once appointed, Vice Chancellors need to have a tenure of six years.
They should have adequate authority and flexibility to govern the Universities with the
advice and consent of the Executive Council.

Social Capital - A Shared Destiny
There has been an emergence of strong private initiative in the education sector and
several institutions of learning have been set up for providing high quality education. This
underscores the need for establishment of stronger ties between educational institutions in
the private and public sectors.
Professional Updation
The Professional Regulatory Bodies in conjunction with the respective National Quality
and Standards Council and the academic institutions should offer short duration courses
of 4 to 6 weeks to practicing professionals for updation and enhancement of skills. Such
courses would acquaint them with the latest trends and developments occurring in their
respective field and update them on clinical and professional issues arising out of new
legislation, technological changes and government policies / pronouncements.
Ethical Education and Training
Once the education part of a profession is hived off to a different machinery, the currently
existing regulatory structure would be free to devote time and energy'to issues of entry
and maintenance of professional ethics and standards. In this context, holding workshops,
seminars and interactive sessions periodically would be of gre~t value.
Enrolment in the Profession
Any further requirement of practical training / internship or a separate set of entrance
examinations may not be needed for enrolment of new members. However, in order to
ensure a healthy growth of the profession, the respective Professional Regulatory Authority
should be empowered to prescribe basic guidelines for enrolment of new members.
Renewal/Revalidation ofR egistration
In all professions, once a person is registered as an entrant, he acquires a lifetime membership.
No process of renewal or reregistration is needed thereafter.
When technology, standards of skills and the functional environment are changing
rapidly, obtaining just a degree at some point of time is not enough to sustain professional
competence for a lifetime. There needs to be a statutory provision that a registration / license
will require revalidation / recertification at specified intervals.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Disciplinary Mechanism
A Professional Regulatory Authority sets and enforces standards in a profession so that
its practitioners can earn the trust of their clients. The autonomy given to a Regulatory
Authority in matters of discipline obliges it to preserve professional purity. For instance, in
the legal profession, it is society's expectation from the legal fraternity that it shall objectively
and diligently provide inexpensive legal aid and advice to all who are obliged to take recourse
to legal remedies. It must remain vigilant and keep strict disciplinary control over breaches
of ethics by its members. This is so with the other professions as well.
The existing in-house mechanisms of the Professional Bodies have not acted in the best
interest of the people or the profession. The Commission is of the view that the participation
of the stakeholders is needed to bring objectivity in the system. Hence, every Disciplinary
Panel should have a membership consisting of senior professionals as well as outsiders
(lay persons) in the ratio 60:40. Whenever a complaint is received, it should be disposed
of within a given time limit (say 90 days). An appeal against a decision of the State Panel
would lie before the Apex Body which again would be required to dispose of the matter
within the same time limit.
Composition of the Self-Regulatory Authorities
Tenure of Office and Collective Leadership
Any attempt to reform these Authorities would require adherence to the following four
core principles:
• Effectiveness
• Inclusiveness
• Accountability
• Transparency
The following factors should be taken into consideration with regard to constitution of
these Regulatory Bodies. First, there should be an overall majority of elected professionals
(in keeping with the principle of professionally-led Regulators). Secondly, there should be
a significant proportion oflay members in them (say in the ratio of 60:40), in keeping with
the principle that professionally-led regulators are required to work in partnership with the
general public. Thirdly, nominated/ government appointed members should also be on the
Board. Lastly, there should be an explicit accountability to Parliament.

Social Capital-A Shared Destiny
The Regulatory Bodies should consist of a large General Council and a small Executive
Committee (EC), each with well defined statutory powers and responsibilities. For instance,
the General Council with 50-60 members would strike a right balance between the
requirements of effectiveness and those of inclusiveness and accountability.
A small Executive Committee consisting of 1 0-15 members would be suitable for preparing
policy papers, for implementing and monitoring policies, and taking urgent executive action.
This Body would be required to work within the boundaries of transparent standing orders
issued by the General Council.
As regards the tenure of the Members and the office bearers, no office bearer should be
allowed to continue beyond one term. However, in case of members of the Council, there
should be a limit of a maximum of two terms.
Clients / Users - as Lay Members in Regulatory Authorities
In order to secure involvement of stakeholders and to encourage diversity of opinions,
there should be representation of lay persons in every forum of a Regulatory Authority.
There should be an impartial mechanism to make appointment of such lay members on
pre-determined criteria. This can be ensured if the government makes the appointments
in consultation with the Regulatory Authority concerned.
Accountability and Parliamentary Oversight
A Self-Regulatory Authority's primary accountability as a statutory Body must be to
Parliament, which, on behalf of the public, defines its powers and responsibilities.
COOPERATIVES
Introduction
Cooperatives as business enterprise possess some basic interests such as ownership and
control but these interests are directly vested in the hands of the user. They follow certain
broad values other than those associated purely with profit making. The values universally
recognized as cornerstones of cooperative behaviour are self-help, democracy, equality,
equity and solidarity. Voluntary and open membership, democratic control, economic
participation, autonomy, training and information and concern for community are the
overarching features by which the cooperatives put their values into practice.
11
I
II

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Existing Weaknesses
Two areas of concern stand out prominently:
(i) Bureaucratisation and Government control-When the colonial rulers officially
brought the cooperatives to India, they created the post of the "omnipotent"
Registrar of Cooperative Societies. The government of Independent India, while
championing the cause of cooperatives, not only retained this key position
~ut also further added a complex hierarchy of bureaucratic power centres to
the existing structure. Existence of such a government controlled cooperative
infrastructure has gone against the very logic of the cooperative movement.
(ii) Politicisation of cooperative leadership - The Boards of a majority of cooperative
Bodies are dominated by politicians. They are cooperators by default. Many of
them are in cooperatives because they want to use this position as a stepping
stone for their political ambitions.
Further, the Indian cooperative sector has failed to inculcate two very essential cooperative
values. The first is that of self-help. A cooperative endeavour should necessarily depend
on its own resources, however small they may be. Its growth and expansion should be
evolutionary.
The other important missing value is the member-centrality. Cooperatives by their very
nature are inward looking organisations. They are meant to serve the member community
unlike outward-looking organisations such as the corporates which operate for profits. The
focus of the activities of a cooperative organisation needs to be on its members. Its business
is to be developed around their needs, policies are to be designed according to their views
and administration is to be carried out through member participation. But, in practice,
cooperatives in India have not adhered to the above norms.
Constitutional Context
On the basis of the recommendations of the Task Force on Revival of Cooperative Credit
Institutions, the Union Government has introduced The Constitutional (One Hundred
and Sixth Amendment) Bill, 2006 in the Parliament on 22nd May, 2006.
The Commission has examined the views expressed by various stakeholders and cooperative
leaders/activists on the merits and demerits of the proposed Constitutional Amendment Bill.
It has been strongly argued by some of them that if the objective of the Bill is to promote
voluntary, democratic, professional, member-controlled cooperative, the amendment
I ,

Social Capital - A Shared Destiny
seeks to do exactly the opposite and will de-facto make these organisations a part of the
government machinery by making them more dependent on the government.
The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Agriculture in its Thirty Second Report on
the proposed Amendment Bill has also opined that a comprehensive amendment to the
Constitution on cooperatives is not necessary. The Committee further recommended
that "the Bill should be converted into a comprehensive central model law for voluntary
formation, autonomous functioning, democratic control and professional management
of the cooperatives with certain incentives and disincentives to the States that implement
or not implement the model law". As regards the amendment in the Constitution, the
Committee recommended that a new Article 43B on empowerment of cooperatives may be
added in Part IV of the Constitution that contains the Directive Principles of State Policy.
The Commission agrees with the above recommendations of the Standing Committee and is
of the view that the objective of the proposed amendment can be better achieved by simply
adding an Article as a Directive Principle where the State could be made responsible for
making laws which will ensure autonomous, democratic, member driven and professional
cooperative institutions. This could be in the form of a new Article 43B as recommended
by the Standing Committee.
At the same time, the right to form and run cooperatives, for economic or noneconomic
purposes, and free from State control, must be recognized as a fundamental right in
unequivocal terms.
The Commission endorses the amendment suggested by the National Advisory Council. A
new Article 19(1)(h) may be inserted to make the right to form and run cooperatives as a
Fundament Right. Article 19 (4) may be correspondingly amended so that enabling laws on
cooperatives can be enacted by the legislatures. Also, an Article in the form of 43B should
be added to Part IV of the Constitution making the State responsible for making such laws
that will ensure autonomous, democratic, member driven and professional cooperative
institutions. With these changes, a large scale Constitutional amendment on the pattern
of the 73rd and 74th Amendments may not be necessary.
Legislative Framework
The legislative environment and framework is one of the most important dimensions of
cooperative reforms. It is strongly felt that the cooperative legislations prevalent in the
country have been one the major factors behind the not so successful cooperative movement
in India. Most of the laws governing cooperatives suffer from control and accountability
related problems. The enactment of the MSCS Act, 2002 and the Mutually Aided/Self-
l

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Reliant/Self-Sufficient Societies Acts by nine States have paved the way for reengineering
and remoulding the cooperative societies but as of now the impact of these legislations
has remained subdued. These legislations have incorporated all the cooperative values and
principles and contain adequate provisions to preserve and strengthen cooperative identity.
The provisions of the Companies Act were also amended in 2002 to allow a cooperative
enterprise to register under the Companies Act as a Producer Company. However, the issue
of duality of control still remains.
The Task Force on the Revival of Cooperative Credit Institutions in its Report (December,
2004) examined the enabling legislations for cooperatives in detail and suggested a Model
Mutually Aided Cooperative Societies Act to be adopted by all the States. The salient features
of the draft model law suggested by the Task Force are as under:
(i) The law is based on internationally accepted principles of cooperation and
ensures that cooperatives function in a democratic manner.
(ii) The model law is member-centric. It ensures that members are in control of
their organisation, and that they can hold accountable those they elect. It places
responsibilities on members, and it gives them the right to manage their own
affairs, based on the responsibilities that they choose to fix for themselves.
(iii) It places responsibilities on elected Directors in such a manner, that elected
positions are positions of responsibility and not only of power and authority.
Accountability of the Directors to the General Body is in-built, and any lapse
is treated seriously. A Director's behaviour is expected to be reported to the
General Body for its scrutiny.
(iv) The Model Law makes it clear that cooperative societies are not the creatures
of the State-nor are they statutory creatures. Membership in these societies is
voluntary and therefore as in the case of Companies, Societies, Trade Unions,
and unincorporated Associations, elections should be an internal affair of each
organisation.
(v) For similar reasons, an Audit Board is not envisaged under this law. The General
Body of each cooperative society will appoint an auditor, and the responsibilities
of the auditor have been made explicit. Presentation of copies of the audited
statements of accounts for the previous year, along with audit objections, to
each member has been made compulsory.

, Social Capital - A Shared Destiny
(vi) Recruitment of staff will be the responsibility of each cooperative society.
Common cadres and recruitment boards are not envisaged. Just as other forms
of citizens' -organisations (Companies, Societies, Trade Unions, unincorporated
Associations) take responsibility for staff recruitment and personnel
management, cooperative societies too should have the right to make all staff
related decisions. Labour laws are expected to apply.
(vii) Profit (surplus) and loss (deficit) are to be shared among members. Cooperatives
are expected to be professionally managed in the truest sense of the phrase, as
Directors have to face their General Body each year and recommend surplus/
deficit sharing to members.
(viii) The law envisages creation of cooperative societies based on mutual aid and
trust amongst members. While cooperative societies are permitted to accept
member savings and deposits, and borrowings from others, they are not
permitted to accept savings from non-members. In case a cooperative wishes
to accept public (non-voting member) deposits, it will need to be licensed by
the RBI and follow such other regulatory norms as prescribed by the RBI.
(ix) The manner of recovery of dues from members is required to be in-built in the
Articles of Association.
The Model Law suggested by the Task Force comprehensively addresses all the issues relevant
to cooperative societies and will enable these institutions to function as autonomous,
voluntary, self-reliant, and democratic business enterprises which can serve the economic
needs and aspirations of their members.
Producer Companies
Government of India constituted a Committee consisting of experts led by Dr. Y.K. Alagh,
an eminent economist and former Union Minister, to 'examine and make recommendations
with regard to (a) framing a legislation which would enable incorporation of cooperatives
as companies and (b) ensuring that the proposed legislation accommodates the unique
elements of cooperative business within a regulatory framework similar to that of companies.
On the basis of recommendations of the Committee, a new Part DCA was inserted in the
Companies Act, 1956 through "The Companies (Amendment) Act, 2002". The legislation
came into force from 6th February, 2003.
The law clearly stipulates that provisions of Part DCA shall override other provisions of
the Companies Act and other laws (Section 581ZQ). The Companies Act keeps Producer

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Companies under the category of private companies but does not impose any restriction
on the number of members. It stipulates that a Producer Company shall not, under any
circumstance, become or be deemed to become a public limited company. Its share cannot be
traded in the Stock Exchanges. The legislation combines the institutional and philosophical
strengths of cooperatives (ownership limited to users; limited interest on shares; absence
of equity trading, patronage and not capital based) with the flexibility and autonomy of
company law.
Implications oft he Irani Committee Recommendations
The ].]. Irani Committee constituted by the Government of India for revamping the
Companies Act, 1956 has recommended that since the management of Producer Companies
is not in consonance with the tenets of the free market determined company structure,
Part IX A (dealing with Producer Companies) should be delinked from the proposed
Companies Act and a new law should be enacted to regulate them.
Changes Proposed in the Producer Companies Legislation
There is need to review the existing provisions in Part IX A of the Companies Act and to
bring about changes that are felt necessary for improved governance and management of
Producer Companies. For this purpose, enactment of a separate law on Producer Companies
is desirable, as recommended by the Irani Committee. The Commission is of the opinion
that the following changes need to incorporated in the proposed new legislation:
• Currently, the objects of the Producer Companies relate to only eleven items
dealing with production, processing, manufacture of primary products and other
related activities. In the interest of their growth and development, the Producer
Companies need to be given a liberal charter of functions; they should be allowed
to take up any primary activity as per their technical and financial capability.
• Depending on their functional requirement and financial strength, a Producer
Company should have full flexibility in creating / abolishing executive and
managerial posts.
• The compliance requirements with regard to the company's audit and accounts
should also be in tune with the size of its operations.
• The law should provide for flexibility in investment of funds, surpluses /
reserves.

Social Capital-A Shared Destiny
• The law should also have provision for proxy voting in order to facilitate smooth
conduct of elections and general meetings.
Cooperative Credit and Banking Institutions
Cooperative credit institutions came into existence as a mechanism for pooling of resources
in rural areas and for providing easy credit access to the rural prople. But in course of time
their financial health has declined considerably. The primary reasons are (a) undue State
interference and politicisation, and (b) poor quality of management. At present, these
institutions are facing a host of problems such as - poor resource base, dependence on
external funding, excessive State intrusion, multiplicity of control, huge accumulated losses,
low recovery, lack of business initiatives and regional disparity.
The Reports of the Task Force on the Revival of Short-term and Long-term Cooperative
Credit Structure (STCCS and LTCCS) has suggested an implementable action plan which
offers substantial financial assistance to States for recapitalisation of their cooperative
institutions. It is subject to acceptance of a few vital legal and institutional reforms at their
end. The recommendations of the Task Force have been accepted by the Union Government
and efforts are being made to implement them in a time-bound manner across the country.
The main recommendations are:
• A one time financial assistant package ofRs.14,839 crores for the short-term and
Rs.4,837 crores for the long-term Rural Cooperative Credit Institutions. The
package is to be shared between the Union and the States.
• The revival package seeks to (a) introduce legal and financial assistance to bring
the system to an acceptable level of health; (b) introduce legal and institutional
reforms necessary for its democratic, self-reliant and efficient functioning; and (c)
take measures to improve management quality of the cooperative institutions.
• The Banking Regulation Act and the Cooperative Societies Acts of the States should
be suitably amended to empower the RBI to lay down regulations and guidelines
for a Cooperative Bank which accepts deposit.
• Further wide-spread amendments have been suggested in the Cooperative Societies
Acts of the States, Banking Regulation Act, and NABARD Act to improve the
management of the cooperative credit institutions.
• A model Cooperative Law is to be enacted by the States. If a State decides not to
pass the Model Act, a separate chapter for Agricultural and Rural Credit Societies

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
containing the salient provision of the model law may be incorporated in the
existing Cooperative legislations of the State.
• The revival package will be conditional and released only on implementation of
the accompanying legal and institutional reforms. The States have been given a
time period of two years for it.
Mter extensive discussions with the State Governments and other stakeholders on the
report of the Task Force on STCCS, the Union Government has formulated a consensus
revival package and sent it to the States for implementation. The recommendations of
the Task Force on the Long Term Cooperative Credit Structure (LTCCS) are also being
discussed on the same pattern and a revival package for long term lending institutions is
also underway.
The Commission feels that implementation of the package designed on the recommendations
of the. Vaidyanathan Committee Report on STCCS will go a long way in reviving and
strengthening cooperative credit institutions. States which have not yet signed the MOU
should be persuaded to do so without further loss of time. There needs to be a strong
follow up of the above recommendations on the part of both the Union and the State
Governments.
A similar exercise should be completed immediately in respect of the Report of the Task
Force on LTCCS.
TOWARDS IN INTEGRATED SOCIAL POLICY
Over the years, we have made significant progress in many spheres. We have been able to
build up an impressive infrastructure for industrial development, the tertiary sector has
shown remarkable growth and many of the social and health sector indices have registered
considerable improvement. But, there are still some areas which are a cause of deep concern.
Approximately 25% of our population continues to live in penury, below the poverty line, a
large part of our work force is either unemployed or under-employed, and our social security
measures contnue to remain inadequate and cover only a fraction of the total population.
Cases of child rights abuse come to notice almost regularly, domestic violence rocks and
destroys many families and incidents of atrocities against the weaker sections are still reported
aplenty. The primary reason behind this situation lies in the fact that our development
process has tried to tackle issues in isolation; in bits and pieces. The government and the
planners have not tried to craft a comp'osite social policy which could take up all the above
issues in a coordinated and complementary manner. The Commission is of the view that

Social Capital-A Shared Destiny
instead of adopting a fragmented development approach, there is need to lay stress on an
integrated social policy which would work on these issues in a comprehensive manner. It
will provide an appropriate focus for both our planners and development practitioners. A
significant portion of the plan allocation should be earmarked for implementation of such
a composite social policy.

REFURBISHING OF PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION
- Scaling New Heights
Introduction
Although several Commissions and Committees have been set up in the past to examine
various aspects of public administration, a comprehensive review of the entire public
administration system was last done by the First Administrative Reforms Commission,
which was set-up in 1966. Since then, several important changes and developments have
taken place driven by the pressing need to reform, rapid changes in technology including
information technology and significant institutional changes like the emergence of a
constituti0Il:ally-mandated system of local government in our country. This has obviously
necessitated the need for a comprehensive review of public administration as mandated
for this Commission.
The Commission's approach to the key principles of civil services reform which need to be
particularly emphasized are mentioned below:
• Setting right the asymmetry of power: It was noted that there is an imbalance in
the exercise of power in governance. Often systemic rigidities, needless complexities
and over-centralization make public servants ineffective and helpless in achieving
positive outcomes. On the other hand, negative power of abuse of authority
thr'ough flagrant violation of law, petty tyranny and nuisance value is virtually
unchecked. This situation is further aggravated by the asymmetry of power in
our society. The 'privileged' government position gives even the lower government
functionaries, enormous power over most of the citizens given the abject poverty,
illiteracy and a lingering feudal culture. This needs to be set right in any effort
towards public services reforms.
• Insulating civil servants from undue political interference: In a democracy, the civil
service has to be answerable to the elected government. There is criticism, however,
that increasingly partisan intervention and cronyism are undermining the Rule of
Law, distorting incentives and condoning corruption. This is adversely affecting

Refurbishing of Personnel Administration - Scaling New Heights
the morale of public servants. The relationship between the political executive and
the civil services needs to be transformed on the basis of mutual understanding,
respect and recognition of each other's distinct roles and responsibilities.
• Professionalisation with stability of tenure and competition: There is need to
recognize the complex challenges of modern administration in various spheres of
activities. Meeting such challenges require domain expertise and long experience in
the sectors concerned. There is also need to foster excellence in the public system.
Existing procedures and practices do not adequately help in developing domain
expertise, nor do they help in utilizing the available domain expertise.
• Citizen-centric administration: The fact that the functioning of the civil services has
an impact on the quality of governance and thus on the well being of the citizen
and the welfare of the community as a whole is often forgotten. The perception of
the civil services today is of a vast impersonal organization without commitment
to human needs and values. It is necessary to redress the situation particularly
in this era of participative democracy by making the governance apparatus an
instrument of service to the people.
• Accountability: There is a general feeling that existing mechanisms of accountability
are inadequate. On the one hand, there are alibis for non-performance and on
the other, competence and integrity are not adequately recognized or rewarded.
Therefore, innovative and effective mechanisms need to be put in place to protect
public money, guarantee intended outcomes and enforce accountability.
• Outcome orientation: Monitoring in government is primarily through measurement
of expenditure against outlays and at best through defined outputs. Clearly, there
is need to move towards measurement of outcomes. A change in this d.irection has
already started with the initial outcome budgeting exercises. In order to engineer
this shift to outcomes, major changes in attitudes, monitoring and evaluation
systems, incentives and accountability measures are necessary.
• Promoting public service values and ethics: Apart from the traditional civil service
values of efficiency, integrity, accountability and patriotism, it is necessary for
civil servants to inculcate and adopt ethical and moral values including probity
in public life, respect for human rights and compassion for the downtrodden and
commitment to their welfare.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
HISTORY OF CML SERVICES IN INDIA AND REFORMS
The First Administrative Reforms Commission
Since Independence, there have been about fifty Commissions and Committees at the
Union Government level to look into what can be broadly characterised as administrative
reforms.
The First Administrative Reforms Commission set up in January, 1966 was asked, In
particular, to consider all aspects relating to the following subjects:
• The machinery of the Government of India and its procedures of work;
• The machinery for planning at all levels;
• Centre-State relationship;
• Financial administration;
• Personnel administration;
• Economic administration;
• Administration at the state level;
• District administration;
• Agricultural administration; and
• Problems of redress of citizens grievances.
A gist of the recommendations of the First ARC that are relevant to this Report are outlined
below:
a. Needf or specialization: The first ARC recognized the need for specialization as
the functions of Government had become diversified. A method of selection
for senior management posts in functional areas and outside functional areas
was laid down.
b. Unified Grading structure: A unified grading structure based on qualifications
and nature of duties and responsibilities was suggested.

Refurbishing of Personnel Administration - Scaling New Heights
c. Recruitment: On this subject, the ARC recommended:
i. A single competitive examination for the Class I services, with the age
limit raised to 26 years.
ii. Lateral entry to technical posts at senior levels.
iii. Direct recruitment to Class II services to be discontinued.
IV. A simple objective type test to be conducted for recruitment of clerical
staff.
v. Recruitment to Central Government posts in certain sectors to be made
from among the State Government employees.
d. Recruitment Agencies:
1. A new procedure for appointment of members of the UPSC and the
State Public Service Commission was suggested.
11. Setting up of Recruitment Boards for selection of clerical staff was
recommended.
e. Training: a National Policy on Civil Service Training to be devised.
f Promotions: Detailed guidelines for promotion were outlined.
g. Conduct and Discipline: Reforms in disciplinary enquiry proceedings and setting
up of Civil Service Tribunals was suggested.
h. Service Conditions: The Commission also gave recommendations on matters
related to overtime allowances, voluntary retirement, exit mechanism, quantum
of pension, government holidays, incentives and awards to be given on timely
completion of projects, and establishing work norms for various posts that may
be reviewed by the Staff Inspection Unit.
Implementation oft he Recommendations
As a result of the deliberations of various Commissions and Committees on different aspects
of public administration and the recommendations made, there have been incremental
reforms-such as creation of a separate Department of Administrative Reforms in the

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Union and State Governments, setting up of the Indian Institute of Public Administration,
setting up of the Central Vigilance Commission, Constitution of Lokayuktas in States,
strengthening of citizens' grievance redressal machinery, drawing up of citizens charters, focus
on training and capacity building of civil servants, restructuring of the recruitment process
and modifications in the performance appraisal system. Many of the recommendations
involving basic changes have not been acted upon and therefore, the framework, systems
and methods of functioning of the civil services based on the Whitehall model of the mid
nineteenth century remains largely unchanged.
NEED FOR REFORMS
There are concerns about the performance of the civil services in the context of realising
a results-oriented government. The Civil Service in India is more concerned with the
internal processes than with results. The systemic rigidities, needless complexities and
over-centralization in the policy and management structures within which the civil service
functions are too complex and often too constraining. The structures are based on hierarchies
and there are a large number of veto points to be negotiated for a decision to eventually
emerge. To compound it, the size and the number of ministries and departments have both
overloaded the decision-making system and diminished the capacities of the individual civil
servants to fulfill their operational responsibilities.
Civil servants in India are accountable to the Ministers in charge of the department, but in
practice, the accountability is vague and of a generalised nature. Since there is no system of
ex ante specification of accountability, the relationship between the minister and the civil
servants is essentially issue-sensitive and civil servants deal with the ministers as the issues
present themselves. The role of the senior civil servants is to advise the ministers about the
long-term social payoff of any proposed policies so that these are not determined by short
term political priorities. The accountability relationship can be anything from all pervasive
to minimalistic and it is left to the incumbent minister to interpret it in a manner that is
most convenient to him/her. This leads to either collusive relationship or to discord, both
of which can adversely affect the Administration.
Rapid and fundamental changes are taking place in the country in terms of economic
growth, urbanization, environmental degradation, technological change and increased local
awareness and identity. The response time to adapt to these changes is much shorter than it
used to be. As instruments of public service, civil servants have to be ready to manage such
change. On the other hand, the perception is that they resist change as they are wedded to

Refurbishing of Personnel Administration - Scaling New Heights
their privileges and prospects and thereby have become ends in themselves. In the political
field, the 73rd and 74th Amendments to the Constitution have brought about a major
change. Rural and urban local governments have to be enabled to become institutions of
self government. To bring this about, the existing system of administration at the district
level has to undergo fundamental changes. Though sixteen years have passed, the progress
remains very slow and local governments are 'local' only in 'form' but are 'central and state
in content'.
Far-reaching changes in the global economy, increased global interdependence and a sea
change in the way governments function have made it all the more necessary to build a
competent, well-functioning civil service. The telecommunications and computer revolution
offer immense opportunities to bring about efficient delivery of services. Here also there
is resistance to simplification of procedures which is a pre-requisite for introduction of
e-governance. In short, if the civil services are to be relevant and competent to meet the
current and emerging needs, nothing short of a mutation will be adequate.
With the passage of time, the role of civil society organisations, in governance, has increased
with demands for better governance. The same can be said of the private sector, which is
increasingly providing services in several areas, which hitherto were the exclusive preserve of
the public sector. Consequently, civil servants should view civil society organisations and the
private sector as partners in the process of the country's governance. There is need to shift
from pre-eminence of governance to effective governance with a focus on decentralization
and citizen-centricity.
RECRUITMENT
The quality of governance is critically dependent on the quality of its public servants. A
major determinant of the quality of government servants is the rigour and integrity of
the recruitment process. Therefore the recruitment process, apart from being transparent,
objective, fair and equitable should also ensure that the right type of persons join the civil
services.
Systems in Other Countries
The Commission has carefully examined the strengths and weaknesses of the existing system.
After careful consideration it is of the view that a new system (post-school grooming) should
be developed over the next few years so that it becomes the main source of recruitment for
the civil services in the future.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Post-School Groomingfor a Public Services Career
Modern administration involves facing complex challenges in critical sectors like public
policy, policing, urban and rural development, delivery of justice, health care, education,
land management, infrastructure, to name a few. Th ese are intricate and often inter-related
issues which require a set of knowledge and skills and an understanding that conventional
university courses do not adequately provide because unlike other specialized courses,
public administration as a subject has still not evolved into a full-fledged graduate course
in our universities. As a result, students who appear for the Civil Services Examination
may have outstanding academic records but often lack the desired level of knowledge in
areas pertaining to their future career in the Civil Services. This underscores the need to
introduce in our higher education curriculum, a formal degree course in public policy and
management. The syllabi in public policy and management must include an understanding
and insight of our Constitution and laws, the political system, social and economic concerns,
public services, human resource management and core principles of good governance.
Such graduate level courses can be introduced either by setting up exclusive institutions for
this purpose or by making the courses available through selected existing universities and
institutions both at the national and State levels. The Commission is of the view that both
approaches are relevant for the country. Government of India should not only establish a
few National Institutes of Public Administration (of the standard of IITs and IIMs) but
some reputed universities and institutions should be assisted in introducing these specialized
courses in public administration and related subjects. It should be possible to create a pool
of well qualified and informed applicants for the civil services.
While it is expected that in due course, applicants who have undergone the above-mentioned
course will have a comparative advantage in the Civil Services Examination, it will also
not be desirable to totally block the chances of other students who wish to appear for the
Civil Services Examination. The entry of graduates from other disciplines like engineering,
science and medicine and the liberal arts etc. has enriched the repertoire of the civil
service. In orderto equip graduates from other disciplines for a career in the civil services
it would be necessary to educate them in the core subjects mentioned earlier. Therefore,
the Commission is of the view that graduates from other disciplines may be permitted to
compete for the civil services examination but only after they have successfully completed
a "bridge" course in public administration. These bridge courses could be offered by the
selected institutes/ universities in such a manner that aspiring candidates can pursue these
along with their regular courses of studies.

Refurbishing of Personnel Administration - Scaling New Heights
These two streams of students will constitute the pool of applicants for the Civil Services
Examination. This would ensure that all applicants will have the pre-requisite knowledge,
understanding and sensitivity which a civil servant should possess. Candidates from these
two streams, on completion of their courses, will be required to appear for the Civil Services
Examination to be conducted annually by the UPSC. In the long run, it is expected that
the specialized centres of excellence (National Institutes of Public Administration) would
evolve as the major source of recruitment to the civil services. The National Institutes
of Public Administration will not only increase competition for selection in the public
services by the education they provide to candidates, but will also facilitate admission to
the disadvantaged and weaker sections of society by providing need-based scholarships to
meritorious students. The Commission is of the view that this policy will serve the twin
objectives of nurturing excellence and promoting inclusion.
In this context, the proposed graduate level courses in public administration could be
structured in the following manner. The initial duration of these courses would be three
years. The courses should have core subjects as well as certain optional subjects. The core
subjects could include Constitution of India, Indian legal system, administrative law,
Indian economy, Indian polity, Indian history and culture etc. The design of the curricula
for the public administration courses to be offered by the selected universities as well as the
'Bridge Course' and the admission criteria should be developed by an Expert Committee
to be appointed immediately by the Government in consultation with the UPSC. This
Committee should inter alia have the following terms of reference:
a. Laying down norms for identification of universities and institutes where the
said
courses would be conducted.
b. Design and content of the curricula for the said courses in public
administration.
c. Prescribing the modalities of admission for these courses.
d. Prescribing the modalities and design of the bridge courses.
The Commission strongly recommends that the Expert Committee be appointed straightway
so that the new courses could be started in atleast some institutions/ universities from
the coming academic year. The Commission also feels that the bridge courses and their
effectiveness should be reviewed based on the experience of five years.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
An added advantage of this system would be that a large pool of professionally educated
administrators would be created which could also be tapped by the State and Local
Governments and other public and private organizations. This is of particular relevance in
the context of the expanding functions of the local governments after the passing of the
Seventy Third and Seventy Fourth Constitutional Amendments, the need to strengthen
State administrations and the increasing role of voluntary organizations and public-private
partnership.
The Commission recognizes that the system proposed -post-school grooming especially the
setting up institutes of public administration as well as identification of the universities for
conducting public management/public administration courses constitutes a major reform
relating to an important area of governance. It will need coordinated guidance, especially
in the initial years. In view of its importance, the Commission would recommend the
constitution of a high-level oversight/coordination committee with the Prime Minister as
Chairman, to meet once in three months and give guidance to the implementing agencies
and concerned institutions.
The Commission recognizes that the proposed reforms will require a lead time of some years.
Meanwhile, the Commission has examined other aspects of the Civil Services Examination
and recommended lowering the upper age limit, reducing the number of attempts and
a revised structure of the Civil Services Examination. These recommendations can be
implemented straightaway. These examination reforms would pave the way for a seamless
transition to the system of recruitment focusing on acquisition of post-school professional
qualifications by aspiring civil servants.
All the Committees have been in favour of an age limit of either 21-26 years or 21-24
years for general candidates with age concession for candidates from OBC and SC/ST
categories. Late entry into the civil services has three undesirable outcomes - it works
against the interests of the weaker sections in the long run, does not enable recruitment
of best candidates at a malleable age and puts a premium on rote learning and coaching
institutes. In the circumstances, the Commission is of the view that the permissible age
for appearing in the Civil Services Examination should be 21 to 25 years for the general
candidates, 21 to 28 years for candidates from the OBC, and 21 to 29 years for candidates
from SC/ST as also for those who are physically challenged.
Lowering the age limit would also require reducing the number of permissible chances
available to different categories of candidates. Presently, the number of permissible
attempts is 4 for general candidates, 7 for candidates from OBC and unlimited for SCI
ST candidates.

Refurbishing of Personnel Administration - Scaling New Heights
The Commission has deliberated on this issue. It is of the view that once the scheme of
testing only in compulsory subjects in place of optional subjects is accepted (as is being
recommended in a subsequent paragraph) the argument regarding large number of attempts
leading to selection ofless deserving candidates is certainly valid. Higher number of attempts
also lead to loss of productive years as also the self confidence of those aspirants who keep
making repeated attempts to pass the examinations. Keeping this in view the permissible
age band and the number of attempts have been recommended by the Commission. This
may be reviewed after five years.
Another issue concerning the permissible age for appearing in the CSE pertains to the cut
off date for determining the eligibility in terms of age. Presently, a candidate must have
attained the age of 21 years and must not have attained the age of 30 years on 1s t August
in the year of the CSE.
Sample Registration System data show that births are more or less evenly distributed with a
slightly higher figure for August and October. The Commission has deliberated on the issue
and it is of the view that there is no visible merit in changing the cut-off date to determine
the eligibility in terms of age.
Structure of the Civil Services Examination
The Existing Structure
At present the Civil Services Examination (CSE) is conducted in three successive stages
viz. the Preliminary Examination, the Main Examination and the Personality Test. The
Preliminary Examination consists of two objective type papers and is meant only for initial
screening of candidates. One of the papers tests the general knowledge of the candidates
and the other tests them in anyone of a large number of optional subjects'. Only those
candidates who qualify in the Preliminary Examination are eligible for admission to the
Main Examination, which consists of a written examination of conventional type papers
and a Personality Test. The conventional type papers test the candidates in (a) compulsory
subjects in the form of one Essay paper, one paper each testing proficiency in the English
language and any of the languages mentioned in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution
and two papers on 'General Studies', and (b) two optional subjects having two papers each.
The test for proficiency in English and any other Indian language is only of a qualifying
nature.
Though there is a case for continuing with a two part examination process, there is little
merit in having them sequentially, that is, first the papers of the Preliminary Examination are

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
evaluated and the results declared, followed by filling up of forms for the Main Examination
leading to 'its conduct, evaluation of answer-books and declaration of the list of candidates
for the Personality Test. Instead, the Commission is of the view that both the Preliminary
Examination having an objective type paper and the Main Examination having conventional
type papers (including the language papers and essay paper) could be administered at
one stage, one after the another on consecutive days. The multiple-choice objective type
paper for the Preliminary Examination could be evaluated first and the evaluation for the
conventional type papers for the Main Examination could be undertaken for only those
candidates who have scored a threshold level of marks.
In the alternative, the civil services examinations can be conducted in the following manner.
After the Preliminary Examination, the tabulation of result should be possible within a
month. Based on the results, the candidates to be called for interview (whose number may
be approximately two to three times the number of available vacancies) would be short-listed
in accordance with their ranking. Only these short-listed candidates would be eligible for
appearing in the Main Examination which would be conducted within two months of the
Preliminary Examination. In other words the Main Examination and interview process
could start almost simultaneously.
The Government may take a considered view and adopt one of the above-mentioned models
in consultation with the Union Public Service Commission (UPSC).
The Issue of Optional Subject Papers
The Preliminary Examination should consist of an objective type test having one or
two papers on general studies. The Main Examination should consist of conventional
type compulsory papers dealing with the Constitution of India, the Indian legal system,
Indian economy, polity, history and culture etc. A Committee may be constituted by the
Government in consultation with the UPSC, to decide on the structure and syllabi of
the compulsory papers for both, the Preliminary and Main Examinations. Further, the
Commission is of the view that sufficient lead time may be provided to the prospective
candidates for the civil services from the date of acceptance of these recommendations.
The induction of officers of the State Civil Services into the lAS should be done by the
UPSC on the basis of a common examination. The UPSC should conduct an annual
examination for officers from the State Civil Service who have completed 8-10 years of
service in Grade 'l\. The eligibility criteria should also include norms such as an upper
age limit of 40 years etc. On the basis of this examination, the UPSC should provide the
State Governments with an eligibility list. State Governments should fill up their quota

Refurbishing of Personnel Administration - Scaling New Heights
for promotion to the IAS on the basis of this eligibility list. However, in order to ensure
that the existing officers in the State Civil Services are not denied adequate opportunities,
the examination in the next two years may be conducted without any upper age limit and
thereafter an upper age limit of 40 years may be introduced. A maximum of two attempts
should be allowed to an eligible candidate for taking this examination. The same principles
should also be applicable to all state civil services, which have a promotion quota in the
other All India Services (IPS and IFS).
Presently, apart from direct recruitment, induction into the Group 'It Central Services is
also done by way of promotion of officers on the basis of Annual Confidential Reports
(ACRs) and 'vigilance clearance'. Further, in case of many of the Central Services, there is
no direct recruitment to Group 'B' posts. The ratio of Group 'It posts to be filled up by
direct recruitment and by way of promotion as well as the mechanism varies from Service
to Service. Thus, the Commission is of the view that induction by way of promotion into
Group 'It Central Services should, in addition to consideration of ACRs, also be done
by way of examination on the basis of the criteria as mentioned above, However, as these
Services have a specific functional role, the nature of the examination, ratio of posts to be
filled by promotion etc. should be decided by the concerned departments in consultation
with the UPSC.
Allotment of Cadres to the All India Services
Government has formulated a new Cadre Allocation Policy (2008). This policy seeks to
achieve a balance between the need for posting officers to different parts of the country
and the "preferences" of the officers. The highlight of the policy is that officers are allocated
to different cadres primarily on the basis of merit and their preferences. This, however, is
subject to the reservation roster and the underlying principle of maintaining a ratio of 1:2
between the insiders and outsiders. The Commission is of the view that the new policy
mitigates to a great extent the shortcomings that characterized the earlier cadre allocation
policy. The Commission endorses the new policy but with some observations.
In view of the special characteristics of the North Eastern States as well as the apparent
reluctance of officers from outside to serve in these States, it is felt that there is justification
for a special dispensation by which 'insider officers' (those domiciled in Manipur, Nagaland,
Mizoram, Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, Tripura and Sikkim) are given a chance to serve in
their own States. This could be done by allotting at least one vacancy in each of the relevant
cadres for persons domiciled in the States listed above. This would mean that every year in a
cadre e.g. Nagaland, at least one vacancy -irrespective of the number of vacancies in that year
-will be earmarked for a successful candidate from Nagaland desirous of working there.
t

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Under the new system proposed above, the list of successful candidates would be taken and
if candidate(s) is/are available from the above-mentioned seven States and if a successful
candidate has opted for the respective home cadre, then he/she should be first allotted to
that cadre. Such an allotment would have to be done irrespective of whether the vacancy
is for that category or not. In case there are more than one eligible insider candidates, then
the allotment may be done in the order - ST, SC, OBC, and General candidates. This may,
however distort the inter-se distribution among the General, OBC and SC/ST categories
at the national level. Therefore having done this allotment, a slight adjustment may be
required in the allocation of vacancies among the different categories in a few other States.
Once the insider quota of the small North Eastern States is filled up, then further allocation
may be done as per the policy issued by the Government of India in 2008.
Promotions
Selections for the All India Services from the State Services are regulated by the respective
promotion regulations/rules. These rules provide for a Selection Committee headed by
the Chairman or a Member of the UPSC. Similarly, for the Central Services there is a
provision for Departmental Promotion Committees to be headed by the Chairman or
Member UPSC. Besides, for all Group A posts, wherever the respective Recruitment and
Promotion Rules so provide, the UPSC is required to hold meetings of the Departmental
Promotion Committees. Over the years this function has expanded in keeping with the
expansion in the structure ofG overnment. This can be seen from the fact that in 2006-07
the Commission considered 1253 cases involving 12760 officials in as many as 353 DPC
meetings for various posts in the Central Services. This indicates that the Commission has
been encumbered with routine administrative matters at the cost of its broader mandate
whiSh is to advise the government on the principles of recruitment and promotion. The
ConHnission, elsewhere in the Report, has suggested that an independent Public Service
Authority should be entrusted with the task of selecting officers for senior positions in
government. For other officers - up to the selection grade - it would be wise to delegate
the routine functions of holding DPCs to the Departments concerned. The UPSC should
be given the broader mandate of supervising these DPCs through mechanisms including
a periodic review and reporting system, audit etc.
The time and expertise of the UPSC should not be taken up in dealing with routine and
(minor' disciplinary cases. The Commission has taken the view that these procedures need
to be streamlined as the large number of steps prescribed in the current procedures have
rendered them cumbersome and ineffective. The Commission is therefore of the view
that consultation with the UPSC should be mandatory only in cases leading to the likely

Refurbishing of Personnel Administration - Scaling New Heights
dismissal or removal of a government servant from service and all other types of disciplinary
cases should be exempted from the UPSC's purview.
CAPACITY BUILDING
The National Training Policy has laid down the road-map for strengthening and streamlining
the training efforts of all the Ministries of Government of India, but in the absence of a
monitoring mechanism, it has not been possible to evaluate the effectiveness of the National
Training Policy. It is high time that monitoring is made an intrinsic part of the 'Training
Policy'.
New Approach to Training Civil Servants
General Principles
The Commission is of the view that, first and foremost, every government servant must
undergo mandatory training at the induction stage and also periodically during his/her
career. Successful completion of these trainings should be a minimum necessary condition
for confirmation in service. Measures to evaluate performance in subsequent training must
be put in place and taken into account in determining suitability for promotions and also
for determining inter-se seniority.
Induction Training
The inputs for instilling the ethos of public service and explaining the structure of the
government machinery, administrative law etc would be common for all Services, whereas
the skills and knowledge required for the specific responsibilities of different Services would
vary. This justifies the current practice of having a common Foundation Course for several
Services and a separate Professional Course for each Service. The Commission is of the view
that all services including technical Services which do not undergo the Foundation Course
at present, should be included in the course. It would also be appropriate if this course
could be conducted at a single institute like the LBSNAA. Infrastructure shortages if any,
in the LBSNAA, will need to be made good to enable them to run an adequate number of
Foundation Courses to cover all Group 'l\ Service officers.
Mid-career Training
The objective of mid-career training should be two-fold; firstly, to update the knowledge
base of the participant in the context of to day's rapidly changing environment, and secondly
to develop competencies for changes in the job profile, as would happen when a promotion

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
takes place. Mid-career programmes can also serve as a medium for enhancing formal
qualifications, thereby creating greater confidence in an officer.
It would be appropriate if a mid career training is conducted a little before a promotion
becomes due. Such a programme would, then, serve three purposes:
1. Help in updating the knowledge base of an officer
2. Develop competencies for the new job profile
3. Test the presence of attributes required for the promoted post and thereby help
assess suitability for promotion
During all phases of their career, officers are called upon to display sound qualities of
leadership and human resource management. Concern for the citizen is a key requirement
in all the activities they undertake. Hence, the mid-career training programme introduced
in 2007 has been designed with this career profile in mind.
With the increased emphasis on updating professional knowledge and skills it is important
that public servants are encouraged to acquire higher qualifications during their career.
Members of Group A services should, for example, be encouraged to acquire Masters
degree in Public Policy/Public Administration preferably before they reach the level of
Joint Secretary. This would be useful since they have to function in an assigned domain
where the expectation is of greater professionalism and conceptual understanding. For the
same reasons the practice of civil servants writing papers for reputed journals needs to be
encouraged.
Institutional Arrangements
Information from the Training Division of the Department of Personnel and Training
indicates that there are at present hundreds of training institutes in the country. However,
only a few of them can be categorized as top class training institutions. It appears that
because of lack of coordination between the various organizations of Government and
also between the Union and State Governments, huge amounts of money have been spent
on "brick and mortar" rather than on investing in top class faculty and modern training
equipment and material. To ensure optimal use of valuable resources it may be advisable to
conduct an evaluation of all the existing institutions to assess their capacity to impart quality
training. Only those which pass the evaluation test should be identified for upgradation
and for further investment of resources. Other institutions should be closed down with
their resources being transferred to institutions identified for continuation.

Refurbishing of Personnel Administration - Scaling New Heights
Oversight
At present, oversight of the training institutions is primarily by the head of the Institution
and to a limited extent by the concerned administrative Ministry. The Commission is of the
view that all apex institutions must have a higher level oversight which not only includes
management issue, but also proper realization of the larger objectives. For example, such
an oversight must encompass the academic content, the quality of delivery, proper selection
and placement of faculty, faculty upgradation and developing a balance between meeting
the needs of the Service and the resource needs of the institute. The Boards of Governors of
the IITs and IIMs are good examples of such mechanisms. A possible oversight arrangement
for the LBSNM would be a Governing Council/Body with the following composition:
1. Cabinet Secretary - Chairman
2. Secretaries of the Departments of Personnel, Home, Environment and
Forests
3. Heads of four to five of the major professional training institutes - SVPNPA,
NADT, IGNFA.
4. A sufficiently large number of eminent experts in the fields of education,
management, law, industry etc.
5. Director, LBSNAA - Member-Convener
The Governing Council/Body should be adequately empowered to enable it. to discharge
its functions efficiently.
Governing Councils on similar lines should be constituted for other national training
academies/ institutes and the State administrative training institutes.
Centre to Promote Good Governance Practices
One weakness in our governance system is the incapacity to institutionalize the best
practices from our own country and elsewhere. Conducting training programmes would
be an important function of these institutions. The centres/institutions of good governance
could be set up by upgrading one of the national/state level institutes and networking it
with existing selected State level public administration training institutes.
..
I!!ft.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
GROUP 'B' AND GROUP 'C' SERVICES
The Group 'B', 'C' & 'D' Employees
Recruitment at Group 'B'Level
In the General Administration set-up, the key Group 'B' officer is the Section Officer and
here also the earlier practice of recruiting them directly has been discontinued. Since all
these officers, as mentioned earlier, function at the cutting edge level and have frequent
interface with civil society, it is necessary to ensure that the most suitable persons hold
these posts. In this context, it is recommended that each Department, dealing with both
the general as well as specialized services, set up Committees to examine what changes
are required in the system of recruitment and promotions to these posts. Prima-facie the
Commission is of the view that in order to infuse fresh thinking, a certain percentage of
vacancies (say 250/0 every year) at the level of Section Officer as well as for other specialized
Group B posts, should be filled through 'Direct Recruitment'.
Recruitment at Graduate Level
Although a large proportion of posts require the candidates to possess a graduate degree, the
prescribed age limit varies from post to post. The Commission is of the view that all such
positions must have the same age limit. The Commission would recommend that the age
limit for all these positions should be 20-25 years for general candidates with a relaxation
of three years for OBC and five years for SC/ST and physically challenged candidates.
The time taken to complete the examination process in the Combined Graduate Level
Examination is well over one year. The large number of candidates taking this examination
has necessitated holding the examination in two stages - preliminary and main examination.
A limited number of candidates screened through an objective type preliminary examination
are then tested in a conventional examination.
The examination system should be based on a well designed objective type question paper.
The advantages of quick evaluation and total objectivity outweigh the disadvantage of not
being able to assess the candidates' presentation skills. This shortening of the examination
process would allow the candidates to join at least a year earlier, and a part of this time could
be utilized for imparting the necessary training so as to upgrade the skills of the selected
candidates. Moreover, even the testing technology through objective type questions has
evolved substantially and these tests can be designed to test various competencies of the
candidates.

Refurbishing of Personnel Administration - Scaling New Heights
There is no need to conduct four different examinations for the various posts. There could
be a common examination and thereafter, the candidates could be allowed to apply for
various posts with this examination score.
Recruitment for LDes
The Commission notes that government has decided that no fresh recruitment will be
made to the LDC Grade (Central Secretariat Clerical Service). Since LDCs may still be
required in some departments/organizations, the Commission has examined their process
of recruitment.
The Commission recommends the minimum qualification to any Group 'C' level posts
(presently LDC, and Stenographer) should be 12th standard pass or equivalent.
The process of recruitment which spans over a year should be reduced. A prolonged process
of examination does not necessarily enhance the quality of the candidates selected and the
same rigorous standards can be applied in well designed objective type examinations. Only
one examination which is of an objective type be held for shortlisting candidates for the
skills test.
The procedure for recruitment at present prescribes a skills test. This test is held on obsolete
machines (manual typewriter). The Commission is of the view that such tests should be
conducted using modern equipment and the Staff Selection Commission should develop
this capability in-house or should outsource this function.
Training
It is necessary to build the capability of all officials, through induction training, before they
are assigned any responsibilities. In addition to the training in specific subjects, emphasis
should be given to courses that will orient the officers and staff to be citizen friendly and
service oriented.
Mid career training should also be imparted through refresher courses to all Group Band C
employees. It is recommended that every employee must attend one professional training and
one soft skill training during a period of 4 years. It may be made essential that at the time
of promotion, employees must have attended and cleared a basic number of professional
trainings and soft skill training programmes.
The Commission also feels that training, apart from professional inputs, should also be
imparted on soft skills like etiquettes, communication skills, attitudinal improvement, stress
management etc. to enable the officers and staff to be responsive and citizen friendly.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Promotion from Section Officer Grade to Under Secretary Grade
In case of promotions from LDC to UDC and Assistant to Section Officer, an element
of 'Limited Departmental Competitive Examination' is present to provide promotional
avenues for deserving officials. However, in case of promotion from UDC to Assistants
there is no such provision. This deprives meritorious deserving candidates (UDCs) of a
chance for an early promotion. Therefore, the Commission is of the view, that the posts of
Assistant in the Central Secretariat Service (CSS) should be filled in the ratio of 40 per cent
by promotion from UDCs of Central Secretariat Clerical Service (CSCS) Cadre, 40 per
cent by Direct Recruitment and 20 per cent through Limited Departmental Competitive
Examination.
Performance Appraisal
It is considered necessary that the appraisal proforma may be revised to capture in a more
precise manner the nature of duties the staff member performs and whether these have
been completed within the specified time frame etc. It is also felt that instead of asking
for a descriptive account of the staff member on each count it may be advisable to give to
the reporting officer multiple options on the level of performance against which he may
indicate the level at which the officer reported upon has performed. The proforma of the
Confidential Report should also include a column wherein the area/field of interest of the
official reported upon (i.e. Health, Information Technology, Finance, Transport, Defence
etc) is indicated, which may be considered for his/her future postings.
There is often considerable delay on the part of Reporting and Reviewing Officers in
completing their assessments in the prescribed proforma. It is necessary that the entire
process of reporting reviewing and accepting the ACRs is completed within 3 months. To
facilitate this process, a mechanism of acknowledging the receipt of the ACR proforma at
various stages may be adopted, which should contain on the first page itself the details of
when the ACR was submitted with the self appraisal to the Reporting Officer, the date when
the Reporting Officer gave his/her comments and forwarded the ACR to the Reviewing
officer and so on.
PLACEMENT AT MIDDLE MANAGEMENT LEVEL
Process ofS election of Officers for Different Positions and the Institutional Mechanism
The Commission is of the view that while posting officers in the Government of India, the
..
paramount consideration should be to post an officer best suited to the job. At the same time
the process of selection should be totally transparent and free from extraneous influences.
m'1

Refurbishing of Personnel Administration - Scaling New Heights
Officers should be posted to a position after a rigorous process of selection.
It has been represented to the Commission that the present system is neither transparent
nor objective. Moreover, the process is carried out for different vacancies as and when they
arise and the list of officers available at that point of time is taken into consideration while
short listing officers for a particular post. Because of this, it is possible that positions do
not get assigned to officers who are most suited for the post.
. All vacancies arising at the level of Deputy Secretary/Director during a financial year should
be identified well before the beginning of that financial year, by the DOPT. The Ministries
concerned should also give a brief job description for these positions. These posts along with
their job des,cription should be notified to the cadre controlling authorities of the concerned
All India Services and Central Services Group 'J\. On receipt of nominations from the
cadre controlling authorities, DOPT should match the requirements of various positions
with the competencies of the officers in the 'offer list'. The Department of Personnel and
Training should thereafter seek approval for the entire list from the Competent Authority.
This would imply that all posting orders would be issued at the beginning of each year and
the officers would join their respective positions on the dates indicated.
There is considerable confusion about the concept of domain competence. It is generally
discussed from the point of view of a generalist to decide as to which Ministry he/she may
be best suited based on his/her experience, aptitude and potential. Domain competence
actually refers to functions and not Ministries. Ministries require officers with different
domain competence and the challenge at senior management levels is to select generalists who
have "specialised" and specialists who have "generalised" and appoint them to appropriate
positions.
Acquisition of domain competency is imperative and steps need to be taken to assign
civil servants at the start of their mid-career to specific domains. It is suggested that the
responsibility of assigning domains should be given to an independent 'Authority'. The
Authority should invite applications from all officers working in the Government who have
completed 13 years of service. The thirteenth year is an appropriate time for assigning the
domain to the officer as he/she would be, at this stage, getting into the Non Functional
Selection Grade (NFSG) scale in the service. At the Union Government level the officer
becomes eligible to become a Director in a Union Ministry. Domain assignment at this
stage of the career would also be appropriate because when the officer is eligible to be at
the level of Joint Secretary he/she would have had at least three to four years exposure to a
domain. Applications for domain assignment should specify the academic background of
the officers, their research accomplishments (if any) and significant achievements during

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
their career relevant to the domain applied for. Officers should be interviewed and their
claims for assignment to specific domains evaluated. On the basis of such an exercise,
the Authority should assign domains to the officers. In case some domains do not attract
applicants, the Authority should assign these domains to officers with relevant backgrounds.
Once the domains are assigned, the government (both Union and State) should post officers
to these domains.
Tenure
The Central Civil Services Authority should be charged with the responsibility of fixing the
tenure for all civil service posts under the Union Government. At present, the functions of
the Authority are envisaged as advisory under the provisions of the Draft Public Services
Bill, 2007. This needs to be changed, and so far as the fixation of tenure is concerned, it is
suggested that the decision of the Authority should be binding on the Government. The
Authority should also be given the responsibility to monitor postings and place before
Parliament a periodic evaluation of the actual average tenure for each post and for the
Central Government as a whole. Establishment of State Civil Service Authorities for the
States with similar responsibilities needs to be urgently taken up by the State Governments
. where tenures are much less stable.
Field Postings of Officers during the Initial Part of Their Career
Generally, officers from the All India Services as well as the other organized Group 'J\.
Services are assigned field postings during the first 8 to 10 years of their service. However,
it has been brought to the notice of the Commission that there have been instances where
State Government/concerned authorities have posted these officers during this period to
the Secretariat/Headquarters instead of in the field. It is necessary for an officer to have
adequate experience in the field and familiarize himself thoroughly with "ground realities"
to enable him to discharge his/her higher responsibilities later. The Commission would,
therefore, strongly recommend that officers from the organized services should not be given
non-field assignments in the first 8 to 10 years of their career.
PLACEMENT AT TOP MANAGEMENT LEVEL
Creating a Leadership Pool
The quality and effectiveness of a nation's civil servants are critical ingredients in determining
its standards of governance. Civil servants, particularly, at senior levels, should possess the
following key attributes -leadership, vision, wide comprehension, professional competence,

Refurbishing of Personnel Administration - Scaling New Heights
managerial focus, ability to innovate and bring about change and to work in a team.
Selection to leadership positions in the civil services is thus vital to the whole process of
governance. The Commission has thereafter suggested a new selection process for placements
at senior positions in Government of India emphasising domain specialisation and greater
competition.
The Present System ofS election of Officers for the Level ofJ oint Secretary/SA G and Above
At present, an 'empanelment' system is in operation in Government of India for earmarking
officers for leadership positions in which only those officers who have superior career records
are put on a 'panel' of names by a group of Secretaries who are entrusted with the job of
evaluating their service records. Only persons on the panel are selected for top civil service
assignments.
The Commission has examined the process of empanelment in Government of India and
found that it suffers from a limitation that it depends solely on the Annual Performance
Appraisal of the officers. By relying only on the ACRs for empanelment, the system overlooks
a very important attribute - the future potential of an officer. Furthermore, selection is
made without either interviewing the officers or testing them formally. Those who are not
empanelled are not given any reasons and have no right of formal appeal.
The Commission is of the view that as all the attributes of an officer, particularly his/her
future potential are not captured by the performance appraisal reports, it would be necessary
to have an independent assessment of the capabilities of the officer. The present procedure
for empanelment of officers to the level of Joint/Additional Secretary and above needs to
be replaced by a transparent, objective and fair placement system.
There is need for introducing an element of competition in appointments to the top
posts both in the State Governments and Government of India. What is proposed is
not an abandonment of the idea of career-based system altogether, but introduction of
a combination of a career-based and a position-based systems in which the career-based
system could be opened up to encourage competition for appointments to senior civil service
positions in Government of India. For creating a senior management or leadership pool in
Government of India, competition can be infused through two main mechanisms:
a) opening up the senior management cadre to all existing Services; and
b) lateral entry by opening the senior management cadre to aspirants from the
private sector who can bring new skills into government.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Opening up the Senior Management Cadre to All Existing Services
The best way to introduce competition would be by ensuring that the Services / departments
/ cadre controlling authorities that wish to participate in this senior management pool
should be required to accept the principle that leadership position in their Services /
cadres should also be thrown open to competition from senior managers both within the
civil services and, in some cases, from the private sector. The earmarking of such common
senior management cadre / pool posts may be done on the basis of consultations between
the departments and the proposed Civil Services Authority and eligibility of departmental
officers to vie for posts in the senior management cadres/ pool may be made contingent
on the completion of this process.
For positions at the Joint Secretary / SAG level, the Authority would follow the interview
process but limit the field to competition amongst all officers from the eligible Group 'J\
Central Services and All India Services officers with the minimum qualifying years of service
and who belong to departments / cadre controlling authorities who are participating in
the pool. The Central Civil Services Authority would stipulate the eligibility criteria, the
required domain expertise as well as the requirements of qualifications, seniority and work
experience. Since the competition here would be among government servants themselves,
the Authority would make the selection based both on the performance in the interview
and the service record of the short listed applicants / civil servants.
Lateral Entry
The Commission feels that lateral entry as done in the past on an ad hoc basis can hardly
be considered a suitable model of manpower planning since the present incumbents in
government departments tend to resist entry of outside talent and the whole process remains
personality driven and inchoate. There is therefore a need to institutionalize the process of
induction of outside talent into the government.
Lateral entries should be done at the present level ofA dditional Secretary / HAG which is a
leadership position from which one can aspire to reach the rank of Secretary to Government.
The Central Civil Services Authority (to be created under the proposed Civil Services
law) should be entrusted with the task of identifying the posts at the higher management
level, HAG and above, where induction of outside talent would be desirable. Such posts
could then be opened for recruitment by tapping talent both from within and outside the
government through a transparent process to be implemented by the Authority.

Refurbishing of Personnel Administration - Scaling New Heights
Fostering Competition in Postings to the Central Police Organizations
.
As far as the police services are concerned, there is need to delineate three broad domains
or areas of expertise viz intelligence, law and order and crime investigation. As in the case
of other civil services, assignment of these domains to police officers should be done fairly
early in their careers, say after 13 years of service, and their postings linked to this exercise.
While domains would, in a sense, get frozen, greater flexibility in posting personnel who
have gained expertise and excellence in working in these domains would have to be built
into the system. On the same pattern as has been recommended for the other civil services,
at the SAG and higher levels in the central police agencies functioning in the three domains
mentioned above, a degree of competition could be introduced. Thus, while postings to
the crime investigation agencies such as the CBI would necessarily have to be limited to
police officials who have the requisite experience in crime investigation; when it comes to
the intelligence agencies and the central paramilitary forces, there may be a case for allowing
lateral entry from the armed forces. In case of the CPOs, the Commission is in agreement
with the views of the Sixth Central Pay Commission recommending that officers of the
armed forces completing their Short Service Commissions (as well as other officers) should
be shifted laterally to these organizations. The Commission therefore recommends that at
the SAG level and above in the CPOs as well as in the Central Intelligence Agencies, officers
from the IPS, from the CPOs as well as the Defence Forces may be allowed to compete.
The Institutional Mechanism
The Commission suggests that an independent 'Authority' should deal with matters of
assignment of domains, preparing panels for posting of officers at the level of SAG and
above, fixing tenures for various posts, deciding on posts which could be advertised for
lateral entry etc. As this Authority would be performing the above-mentioned crucial
tasks, it would be necessary to ensure its independence by giving it a statutory backing and
stipulating that it should be headed by an eminent person with experience of public affairs
to be appointed by the Prime Minister in consultation with the Leader of the Opposition
in the Lok Sabha. The Authority should have a full time Member-Secretary of the rank of
Secretary to Government of India, and persons of eminence in public life and professionals
with acknowledged contributions to society as Members of the Authority. This Authority, to
be named as the Central Civil Services Authority, should be constituted under the proposed
Civil Services Act. As the constitution of the Central Civil Services Authority under a new
law may take some time, the said Authority may be constituted, initially, under executive
orders .
.. I

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
DEPUTATION OF CIVIL SERVANTS TO ORGANIZATIONS OUTSIDE
GOVERNMENT
The revised guidelines (2007) have prohibited deputation to Companies registered under
the Companies Act of 1956. The underlying principle seems to be that government servants
should not be allowed to go on deputation to private commercial organizations.
The Commission has separately recommended that at higher levels of government, lateral
entry from the private sector should be introduced. Facilitating a free flow of civil servants
to the private sector for brief periods, however, is a more complex issue, and the policy
could indeed result in a serious conflict of interest. The Commission is of the view that
the dangers of possible conflict of interests outweigh any possible benefits that movement
of civil servants to the private sector and back. The situation could, however, be reviewed
after 3 years.
The guidelines allow movement to specified private bodies that are not registered as
companies. This does not recognize the fact that there are societies and trusts as well as
cooperatives that undertake activities which are commercial in nature. Also there are
companies which are not profit oriented. It is the objectives and activities of the organizations
that will determine its status as a commercial enterprise and not its organizational structure.
Therefore, it may be more useful to make a distinction between the organizations to which
deputation may be allowed on the basis of their activities. For the present, Government
should.p ermit deputation of civil servants to only such organizations that are engaged
mainly in non-profit making activities.
PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
Making the Existing Personnel Performance Appraisal System Effective
Making; Appraisal More Consultative and Transparent
The Commission is of the view that a two-way consultative process leads to the fixing
of more realistic targets which would have greater acceptability. This would also help in
improving the performance of the officers and equally of the organization in which they
work. Therefore the new PAR format prescribed for the All India Services should also be
introduced for other Central Services/organizations.
The newly introduced AIS Performance Appraisal Rules have provided for a transparent
approach regarding the annual performance appraisal reports and it has been stipulated that
the full annual performance appraisal report, including the overall grade and assessment of

Refurbishing of Personnel Administration - Scaling New Heights
integrity, shall be disclosed to the officer reported upon. Similar provisions for promoting
transparency also need to be introduced in respect of all Services/ organizations.
Performance Appraisal Formats to be Job Specific
The appraisal formats of civil servants need to be more specifically linked to the tasks
assigned to them and to the goals of the Department/Organization in which the officer is
working. To meet this objective, the appraisal format prescribed for civil servants should have
three sections i.e. (i) a generic section that meets the requirements of a particular Service
to which the officer belongs, (ii) another section based on the goals and requirements of
the department in which he is working, and (iii) a final section which captures the specific
requirements and targets relating to the post that the officer is holding.
Performance Appraisal to be Year Round
At present, the annual performance exercise is performed in a routine manner. No effective
consultations regarding setting targets for the civil servant concerned takes place even though
guidelines call for such consultations. No detailed work plans or mid-year review of the
performance of the civil servants being appraised have been prescribed. The revised All India
Services (PAR) Rules rectifY this situation by providing for an agreed work plan for the year
to be decided in consultation between the offi cer and his/her reporting officer which has
to be reviewed again in September/October and revised if required by 31st October. By
incorporating provisions for a detailed work plan and a mid-year review, the new rules have
helped to ensure effective and continuing consultations for target setting. The Commission
is of the view that similar provisions should also be introduced for other Services.
Formulating Guidelines for Assigning Numerical Rating
In the new PAR format for All India Service Officers they are assigned a numerical grade
from 0 to 10 for different parameters. The numerical gradings secured by the officers still
depend on the subjective evaluation made by the reporting and reviewing officers. It is quite
possible that officers of similar competence and performance may be assigned different
numerical grades depending on the disposition -liberal or otherwise - of the reporting/·
reviewing officer. The Department of Personnel and Training should formulate detailed
guidelines to guide the reporting and reviewing officer for assigning numerical ratings for
their subordinates. It would also be necessary to incorporate training modules on this aspect
in the training programmes for civil servants. This should be supplemented by preparing
a computerized data base wherein the details of the officers reported upon as well as the
reporting and reviewing officers are captured for further analysis.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Government has taken a step forward towards introduction of a performance management
system by making a provision in the proposed Public Services Bill 2007 which provides
that the Government shall establish a Performance Management System for Public Service
employees.
This is a welcome step. The Commission however recognizes that every organization in
government will have to develop its own performance management system based on its
unique requirements, but which incorporates the basic tenets of a good performance
management system. The provision in the proposed Bill may be confined to making
mandatory, a performance management system for every organization in the government,
without getting into minute details.
Introducing a Performance Management System
In implementing PMS in government, it must be emphasized that the PMS has to
be designed within the overall strategic framework appropriate to the particular Ministry/
Department/Organization. It is also necessary to link individual contributions to
strategic objectives of the organization. It will therefore be necessary for each ministry/
department/ organization to customize its PMS relevant to them while incorporating the
general features of
a. The strategic intent
b. Individual assessment
c. Development of the individual - effect at departmental and organizational
levels
d. Enhancing quality
e. Process reviews:
£ Self monitoring.
Performance Agreements
Performance agreement is the most common accountability mechanism in most countries
that have reformed their public administration systems. This has been done in many forms
- from explicit contracts to less form~ negotiated agreements to more generally applicable
principles. At the core of such agreements are the objectives to be achieved, the resources·
provided to achieve them, the accountability and control measures, and the autonomy and
flexibilities that the civil servants will be given.

Refurbishing of Personnel Administration - Scaling New Heights
The performance agreements should be signed between the departmental Minister and
the Secretary of the Ministry as also between the departmental Minister and heads of
Department, well before the financial year. The annual performance agreement should
provide physical and verifiable details of the work to be done by the Secretary/Head of
the Department during the financial year. The performance of the Secretary/Head of the
Department should be assessed by a third party - say, the Central Public Services Authority
with reference to the annual performance agreement. The details of the annual performance
agreements and the results of the assessment by the third party should be provided to the
legislature as a part of the Performance Budget/Outcome Budget.
MOTIVATING CIVIL SERVANTS
The Sixth Pay Commission has recommended introduction of a new performance
based pecuniary benefit, over and above i:he regular salary, for Government employees -
Performance Related Incentive Scheme (PRIS). It is based on the principle of differential
reward for differential performance. The Commission agrees with the recommendations
made by the Pay Commission.
Non-monetary Motivating Factors
There is need to further emphasise that incentives like conferring the Padma awards more
frequently on serving civil servants as well as other awards for recognizing good performance
should also be instituted at the State and district levels. It must further be ensured that
selection for such awards is made through a prompt, objective and transparent mechanism
because the value of such awards should not get compromised by either subjectivity or lack
of transparency. Further, all organizations should evolve their own in-house mechanism
for rewarding good performance from simple, verbal and written appreciation to more
tangible rewards.
It should be the responsibility of the head of the office to examine the job content of each
person working in the organization and then ensure that the job is rich content-wise so that
the employee derives a sense of satisfaction by performing tasks assigned to him. The head
of the office could seek the assistance of a professional agency for this purpose.
Linking Career Prospects with Performance
Posts in foreign countries are mostly encadred in the Indian Foreign Services (IFS).
However, there are a limited number of posts for which officers from other Central/All
India Services are also considered. These assignments are generally coveted and considered
to be prestigious. The general impression, however, is that selection to these positions are

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
often not done in a transparent and objective manner. The Commission, recommends that
all foreign assignments (other than those for officers of the IFS) should be made, based on
the recommendations of the Central Civil Services Authority. The Authority should follow
the due process of inviting applications from eligible candidates and preparing a panel of
officers who are most suitable for such assignments based on their domain competence.
It should be the responsibility of the head of each office to ensure that a congenial work
environment is created. Indeed, one of the inputs for evaluating the performance of a
supervisory officer should be the extent to which he/she has created a congenial atmosphere
in the office by addressing the 'dissatisfiers'.
ACCOUNTABILITY
Accountability ofP ublic Servants
There is need to have a comprehensive in-depth assessment at important milestones in an
officer's career. These assessments, in view of the Commission, should be carried out on
completion of 14 and 20 years of service.
The first review at 14 years would primarily serve the purpose of apprising the public servant
about his/her strengths and shortcomings for future advancement. This should also be used
for assessing his/her training needs. The second review at 20 years would mainly serve to
assess the fitness of the officer for further continuance in government service. The detailed
modalities of this assessment would need to be worked out by government.
The services of public servants who are found to be unfit after the second review at 20 years,
should be discontinued. A provision regarding this should be made in the proposed Civil
Services Law. Besides, for new appointments it should be expressly provided that the period
of employment shall be for 20 years only. Further continuance in government service would
depend upon the outcome of the intensive performance reviews. The Commission feels that
these reviews combined with the changes suggested in the performance management system,
disciplinary proceedings and the reforms in the recruitment and training of civil servants
would make the entire system much more professional, responsive and accountable.
DISCIPLINARY PROCEEDINGS
The Commission has recommended that Article 311 of the Constitution should be repealed
and appropriate and comprehensive legislation under Article 309 could be framed to cover
all aspects of recruitment and service, even with regard to dismissal, removal or reduction
in rank. A comprehensive Public Service Bill is currently being prepared by Government

Refurbishing of Personnel Administration - Scaling New Heights
of India. It would be opportune therefore to include in this new legislation, appropriate
provision for rationalization of the cumbersome disciplinary procedures that presently make
it difficult to ensure accountability in government departments. With the repeal of Article
311, the CCS (CCA) Rules, 1965 would also have to be repealed and new rules framed.
The Commission is of the view that the following changes are necessary while drawing up
disciplinary procedures:
• The new Civil Services Law should set out only the minimum statutory disciplinary
and dismissal procedures required to satisfy the criteria of natural justice leaving
the details of the procedure to be followed to the respective departments. A
natural corollary of this proposition is that the CCS (CCA) Rules, 1965 would
be repealed.
• The penalty of dismissal or removal of a public servant should only be imposed
by an authority three levels higher than the present post held by that public
servant whereas all other penalties may be imposed by an authority who is two
levels higher. The right to appeal to an officer at least one level higher than the
disciplinary authority would be continued.
• However, no penalty would be imposed without holding an inquiry/interview
wherein the accused Government servant is given an opportunity of being
heard.
• The inquiry into the charges brought against a government servant should be a
simple two stage process with the following parameters:
• The charges against the government servant should be communicated to him
in writing.
• The inquiry process should be based to the maximum extent possible on
documentary rather than oral evidence.
• Fixed and brief time limits should be prescribed for admission and denial of
documents from both sides followed by a meeting/ disciplinary interview to
give the government servant a chance to respond to the charges.
• the degree to which an oral examination would be part of the inquiry process and
the extent to which the procedures that are borrowed from court proceedings ·
such as cross examination, reexamination etc, would be permissible; should
be left to the enquiry officer to decide depending on the facts of the case but
should not be the norm as is currently the case.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
• Preponderance of probabilities rather than beyond reasonable doubt would
be the standard of evidence required for the inquiry authority to reach his/her
conclusions.
• The two-stage consultation with the CVC in cases involving a vigilance angle
should be done away with and only second stage advice after the completion of
the disciplinary process, should be obtained. In addition for cases involving a
vigilance angle, no consultation with the UPSC should be required.
• Consultation with the UPSC should be mandatory only in cases leading to the
proposed dismissal of a government servant and all other types of disciplinary
cases should be exempted from the UPSC's purview.
RELATION BETWEEN THE POLITICAL EXECUTIVE AND CIVIL SERVANTS
The Commission is of the view that the political neutrality and impartiality of the civil
services needs to be preserved. The onus for this lies equally on the political executive and
civil servants. The Commission in its Report on "Ethics in Governance" recommended that
a codes of ethics for Ministers and a code of conduct for civil servants be established.
Statutory Role oft he Civil Servants
The Commission in its Report on "Ethics in Governance" while examining the definition
of corruption under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 has recommended that "abuse
of authority unduly favouring or harming someone" and "obstruction of justice" should
be classified as an offence under the Act. This is reiterated.
Appointments/Recruitment to the Civil Services
It is essential to lay down certain principles/norms for such recruitments to avoid complaints
of favouritism, nepotism, corruption and abuse of power that have often characterized these
recruitment exercises. These principles are:
i. Well-defined merit-based procedure for recruitment to all government jobs
ii. Wide publicity and open competition for recruitment to all posts
iii. Minimisation, if not elimination, of discretion in the recruitment process
iv. Selection primarily on the basis of written examination or on the basis of
performance in existing public/board/university examination with minimum
weightage to interview.

Refurbishing of Personnel Administration - Scaling New Heights
CML SERVICES CODE
In India, civil service values have evolved over years of tradition. These values also find place
in various rules, including the Code of Conduct. The current set of 'enforceable norms'
are 'Conduct Rules', typified by the Central Civil Services (Conduct) Rules - 1964 and
analogous rules applicable to members of the All India Services. the code of behaviour as
enunciated in the Conduct Rules, while containing some general norms like 'maintaining
integrity and absolute devotion to duty' and not indulging in 'conduct unbecoming of a
government servant', are generally directed towards cataloguing specific activities deemed
undesirable for government servants. There is no Code of Ethics prescribed for civil servants
in India. A comprehensive Civil Service Code can be conceptualized at three levels. At the
apex level, there should be a clear and concise statement of the values and ethical standards
that a civil servant should imbibe. These values should reflect public expectations from a civil
servant with reference to political impartiality, maintenance of highest ethical standards and
accountability for actions. At the second level, the broad principles which should govern
the behaviour of a civil servant may be outlined. This would constitute the Code of Ethics.
At the third level, there should be a specific Code of Conduct stipulating in a precise and
unambiguous manner, a list of acceptable and unacceptable behaviour and actions. The
Commission feels that the values and the Code of Ethics should be given a statutory backing
by including them in the proposed Civil Services Bill.
The Conduct Rules need to be completely redrawn based on the values and code of ethics.
The proposed Central Civil Services Authority may be consulted while drawing up the
Conduct Rules and for interpreting any 'grey areas' that may emerge in enforcing these
Conduct Rules. The recommendations regarding the 'Civil Services Values' and the 'Code
of Ethics' would have to be incorporated in the proposed Civil Services Bill.
THE CML SERVICES LAW
Legislative Intent in Other Countries
Experience of Other Countries
Legislative commitment has been an important factor in ensuring the success of civil service
reform initiatives in several countries during the last two decades. Legislative support
provides not only a legal framework for civil service reform but ensures the continuity of
these reforms. Such legislation plays a pivotal role in describing and establishing the core
principles which civil servants should imbibe. It also provides a clear, unified framework
within which the civil servants can perform their roles and discharge their responsibilities.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
A new law is often needed to create and empower institutions which would ensure that
the civil servants discharge their duties while upholding the principles enshrined in the
Constitution.
Need for a Civil Services Law
Arguments For and Against
The Commission is of the view that, in the Indian context, it is important to examine what
is sought to be achieved by the contemplated legislation and what would be the salient
features of the proposed Public Service Law. The Commission has recommended a slew of
measures for reforming the civil services. Some of these measures would require a legislative
backing which could be embodied into a new Civil Services Law. The recommendations
made by the Commission could be grouped into the following:
a. A set of values for civil servants
b. Redefining the relationship between the government and the civil servants
c. Reforms in the recruitment procedures to the civil services
d. Reforms in the procedure of placement as well as security of tenure - a new
institutional mechanism
e. New terms and conditions of appointment
f. Improving accountability mechanisms simplifying disciplinary proceedings
g. Creating new organisational structures in government.
Redefining the Relationship Between Government and Civil Servants
The Commission is of the view that the status of a civil servant vis-a.-vis the government
could be spelt out in a new law to be enacted under Article 309. Safeguards based on the
principles of natural justice should be provided under the new law.
Reforms in the Recruitment Procedures to the Civil Services
Government also appoints a sizeable number of persons at different levels without routing
the selection process through the UPSC or the Staff Selection Commission. Commission
is of the view that all appointments - even if they are for a short term - are made after

Refurbishing of Personnel Administration - Scaling New Heights
following a procedure that is fair, just and transparent. This could be included in the new
law. In order to make this provision effective, it may be provided that an independent
agency should audit the recruitments carried outside the UPSC and SSC system and advise
government suitably. The same principle should be made applicable to appointments for
various Agencies, Committees, Commissions, Statutory and Regulatory Bodies.
Reforms in the Procedure of Placement as well as Security of Tenure - a New Institutional
Mechanism
The Commission has examined the system of placement at the senior management level
and made detailed recommendations. The Commission has recommended that all positions
in Government (including in the attached and subordinate offices) at the level of Joint
Secretary and above would constitute the 'Senior management Pool'. All appointments to
positions in this pool shall be made on the recommendations of the Central Civil Services
Authority, which would go into the past performance and also evaluate the future potential
of an officer.
The Commission has also recommended stipulation of tenure for various posts under
the government. This task of fixing tenures for various posts may also be assigned to this
independent agency - the Central Civil Services Authority. The Commission has also
suggested that candidates outside the government system should be allowed to compete for
certain posts at senior levels (Additional Secretary and above). The task of identifying these
posts should be entrusted to this agency. The Commission is of the view that it would be
necessary to include these stipulations in the proposed Civil Services Bill.
New Terms and Conditions ofA ppointment
The Commission is aware that a lifelong job security provided to a government servant has
lead to a distorted incentive system. Because of this, an element of complacency and inertia
has got internalised in the civil services. The Commission has therefore recommended that
there should be a system in which the suitability of all government servants is reviewed
after 20 years of service and their further continuance in service should depend on the
outcome of this performance evaluation. In order to ensure that this stipulation applies
to all new entrants to government service, this provision should be incorporated in the
proposed new law.
Improving Accountability Mechanisms - Simplifying Disciplinary Proceedings
The Commission has suggested that the process of enquiry should be simplified and the
large number of stages in the process need to be reduced. It is felt that while the detailed

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
procedure of enquiry could be spelt out in terms of Rules, but it would be better if certain
basic principles which need to be adhered to are outlined in the new law.
Creating New Organisational Structures in Government
The constitution of the Central Civil Services Authority has already been examined by the
Commission in Chapter 9 and it has been recommended that this Authority should be set
up under the proposed Civil Services Bill.
Creation of executive agencies in government departments has been one of the major reforms
in many countries. It would be desirable if the mechanism of creation of executive agencies,
principles governing their relationship with the government etc are laid down in a law.
All the above measures would require to be supported by a law. Therefore, the Commission
is of the view that a Public Services Law (more appropriately called the Civil Services Law),
incorporating the above measures should be enacted.

PROMOTING e-GOVERNANCE
The SMART UJay Forward
CORE PRINCIPLES OF e-GOVERNANCE
Clarity of Purpose
There needs to be a clear understanding and appreciation of the purpose and objectives to
be achieved through e-Governance. In the past, a large number of projects appear to be
based on what technology can achieve rather than what the citizens need. A corollary to this
would be a precise definition of the parameters against which any future evaluation would
be done. e-Governance should not be taken up merely to demonstrate the capability of an
existing technology, but the technology should be adopted to solve an existing problem.
Citizen-centricity should be at the heart of all e-Governance initiatives.
Environment Building
There is need to change the mind-set of all the stakeholders involved, i.e. politicians,
government officials and civil society at large. As the task involves redesigning of
governmental processes at various levels, implementing e-Governance would require political
support at all levels. Government personnel would have to be incentivised to change old
habits and acquire new skills. In the public, awareness needs to be created so that there is a
constant demand for reforms in governance through implementation of e-Governance. In
the end, the environment should be such that the perceived threat to entrenched interests
is removed and resistance to change is addressed by dealing with actual grievances. Thus,
the positive approach of government personnel towards the needs of citizens would be the
necessary elements for creating a conducive environment. Raising public awareness, forming
partnerships with academic institutions - public and private, Public-Private Partnerships
(PPPs), exchange of best practices including with the private sector and involvement of
citizen-groups should all form part of this process.
e-Governance as an Integral Part ofR eform in Governance
e-Governance cannot be separate from governance as a whole. It has to be an integral
part of the governance structure and processes. Thus, every government organization or

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
entity, every government programme or policy and every law and regulation would have
to integrate e-Governance modules within itself rather than brought-in as an afterthought
or introduced as an adjunct. The Commission has all along adopted this approach. This
is because under e-Governance, the focus is always on 'governance' and the range of
technological tools provided by Information and Communications Technology is utilized
to bring about changes keeping in mind the needs of the citizens and the organization
itself As governance covers a very wide range of activities in each area, the structures and
processes which need to be changed or modified through use of technology would have to
be identified separately. This task cannot be performed satisfactorily if e-Governance is not
made an integral part of the organization which is undertaking to reform itself
E-preparedness and Step-wise Approach
e-Governance cannot ?e introduced in the whole country across government organizations
at one go. Different organizations are not, presently, at the same level of e-preparedness.
There has to be a step-wise approach to e-Governance so that outcomes are maximized and
citizens reap early benefits from e-Governance. These steps are mentioned below:
i. E-preparedness
ii. Identification of e-Governance projects by each organization/entity
iii. Prioritization:
iv. Business process re-engineering
v. Developing technological solutions
vi. Implementation of e-Governance projects
As e-Governance is expected to touch all aspects of governance - economic, social and
administrative, identification and prioritisation of e-Governance projects assumes great
significance. E-preparedness and a step-wise approach is a recipe for starting small but
building up on successes.
Disciplined Ulay ofW orking
e-Governance requires a disciplined and systematic way of working in organizations. Most
technologies pre-suppose a set of rational behaviour on the part of users. This element needs
to be emphasized during the capacity building as well as in the life cycle of the project.

Promoting e-Governnance - the SMART way Forward
Monitoring and Evaluation
Close monitoring of e-Governance projects is necessary in both the pilot phase as well as
during the actual working of the up-scaled project. This helps in early detection of problems
and hence facilitates prompt corrective action. However, apart from periodic monitoring
of e-Governance initiatives in the post-implementation stage, there would also be need for
evaluation of the impact of such initiatives through independent agencies against parameters
which would determine whether the objectives have been achieved or not.
Developing Secure) Fail-safe Systems and Disaster Recovery Systems
Given the scale of potential e-Governance applications in the country and the prospective
mammoth flow of data involved, the technological architecture on which such applications
are mounted would need to be made not only secure but also fail-safe. Mechanisms
would have to be incorporated which would put the systems in the 'safe mode' in times
of crisis. Further, depositories and 'mirrors' would need to be created with sound disaster
recovery modules with adequate security features to prevent loss of data and collapse of
the system.
Unless security features are properly implemented, electronic transactions are more prone
to fraud and abuse than traditional paper-based transactions. As governments move toward
providing the full range of government services online with the capability to conduct sensitive
transactions, it needs to be ensured that these transactions are secure and the privacy of
citizens is not compromised. Over and above, these systems would also need to be insulated
from the possibility of cyber-attacks, hacking etc.
Sustainability
In the end, e-Governance initiatives need to be sustainable. Once it has been established
that any particular initiative is the better way of providing services or information to the
people or conducting the business of government, it should not be allowed to relapse on
grounds of expediency. Reforms are always harder to implement and sustain, but once they
take root, they deliver the best results. Sustainability could be addressed in many ways -
some initiatives may require designing in a way that they are financially sustainable. Others
may be driven by administrative objectives or simplicity of use. Saving of time and money
may be the driving force in case of some projects. All these are objectives, which on their
own merit, justify the continuance of any particular initiative. If projects have been able to
achieve any of these objectives, their sustainability should not be allowed to be jeopardized
on some other grounds.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Allowing for Horizontal Applicability
A coordinating mechanism is needed to prevent cases of re-inventing the wheel. Different
States across India face similar types of challenges. Past experience has shown that a number
of States have undertaken e-Governance projects to address similar concerns. To make
e-Governance more cost effective and successful, successes need to be adopted across States
and organizations thereby minimizing costly repetitions and in many cases, failures.
Development ofL ocal Language Interfaces
As India is a multilingual society, e-Governance initiatives need to provide citizen interfaces
in the respective local language. Thus, displays and keys should be based on localized
interfaces and multi-media instructions should be commonly used to make the interface
accessible in rural areas, where low literacy rates can be an obstacle.
e-Governance - a Continuing Process
e-Governance represents a paradigm shift in the field of governance reforms. Bringing it
about would have to be a continuing process which would require many adjustments. It
has been well said that e-Governance is a journey and not a destination.
IMPLEMENTING e-GOVERNANCE REFORMS
Building a Congenial Environment
As government organizations function at varying degrees of IT-preparedness, there is first
of all a need for building an environment within government organizations at various levels
which is conducive to e-Governance. This would require computerization of the lowest
possible unit, as well as building capacity at the individual level which recognizes the need
for reforms in processes using modern technology. The essential elements in this phase are
as follows:
i. The will to change
ii. Political support at the highest level
iii. Incentives
iv. Awareness
v. Overcoming resistance to change
vi. Training and capacity building

way
Promoting e-Governnance - The SMART Forward
Identification ofe -Governance Projects and Prioritisation
The basic approach in case of e-Governance projects should be to focus on 'KISS': 'Keep it
Small and Simple' principle. Thus, first of all, government entities should identify projects
which would lead to providing useful and timely information to citizens. There is need to go
beyond the requirements of Section 4(1) of the Right to Information Act, 2005 and provide
accessible information to citizens on the basis of an analysis of their perceived needs.
Those e-Governance projects should be identified which do not require the immediate
creation of a historical database for providing services. Such initiatives could include services
such as registration of births and deaths, albeit, prospectively. The design of the interface
should be such that it should enable the activity to cater to future needs.
Thirdly, those projects could be identified which allow for making elementary online
transactions including payment for services. Payment of electricity bills etc. come under
this category. Such initiatives are easier to implement and provide perceptible improvements
in the quality of services delivered to citizens.
Fourth, are initiatives which require verification of information/ data submitted online. A
higher level of technological and process re-engineering required is represented by initiatives
which cater to provision of services such as issuing of licences, registration for PDS (Public
Distribution System), etc.
Finally, those projects should be identified which require creation of and integration into
complex databases. These would be represented by initiatives which would involve creation
of complex databases such as the National Citizen ID, which would then be linked to
other databases and services. It would also include initiatives such as computerization of
land records, which would further require integration of various databases including land
surveys, manual records, satellite data etc. and involve many agencies.
If all these initiatives are undertaken at one go, then there is every possibility of costly and
frustrating delays and creation of iOneffective systems which would lead to dissatisfaction.
Thus, as mentioned in the chapter on core principles, prioritization is required to provide
early benefits to citizens. The five levels of projects mentioned above also represent the five
levels of prioritization based on ease in implementation, time taken in implementation and
impact on the citizens. Different organizations could follow the same principles in prioritizing
projects. However, another criterion for working out the priority of e-Governance projects
could be on the basis of the needs of citizens. In some cases, these may not suggest to
adoption of the easy path. Although, it is advisable that projects easy to implement should

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
be taken up first, but at the same time, it is necessary to ensure that the needs of the citizens
are also given due importance while prioritizing e-Governance projects. It also needs to be
recognized that different government organizations/departments, both at the Union and
State Government levels, are best placed to identify the initiatives which would require
prioritization on the twin basis of ease in implementation and the needs of the citizens.
Thus, a broad framework of initiatives at different levels of complexity would have to be
created by the organizations/departments themselves. It would be the role of the respective
IT departments to coordinate the activities of various organizations/departments in this
endeavour and provide them technical support if needed.
Business Process Re-engineering (BP R)
The Commission has considered the issues involved in re-engineering of business processes
in government entities. It is of the view that for every function a government entity performs
and every service or information it is required to provide, there should be a step-by-step
analysis of each process involved on the anvil of rationality and simplicity. Such analysis
should incorporate the viewpoints of all stakeholders. After identifying steps which are
redundant or which require simplification, the provisions of the law, rule, regulation,
instruction, code, manual etc. which form the basis of such steps should also be identified.
This should be followed by prioritizing the functions of the government entity. Following
this exercise, processes should be re-designed using the tools provided by Information
and Communications Technology keeping in mind the objectives of speeding up decision
making, maximizing outputs, minimizing costs, improving service delivery and quality
of information to be provided etc. This should be accompanied by re-formulation of the
legal/ regulatory framework which underly governmental processes.
To sum up, the Commission feels that the entire gamut of activities under Business Process
Re-engineering could be classified into the following four heads:
a. Clear assessment of citizens needs.
b. Analysis of the existing processes and identification of the weaknesses and
redundancies.
c. Redesigning of processes and the required changes to be made in the statues
and regulations.
d. Bringing about changes - in forms, processes, structures and statutes.

Promoting e-Governnance - The SMART wtty Forward
Capacity Building and Creating Awareness
e-Governance represents a paradigm shift in the manner of delivery of government services.
This shift requires considerable enhancement in managerial and technical capabilities of
government organizations as well as of government servants. Above all, it requires a basic
change in the outlook and functioning of government, so that it becomes citizen-centric
rather than process-centric. This would necessarily involve a comprehensive capacity
building exercise.
It may not generally be feasible to develop all the required competencies within an organization.
The technological capabilities in the field of ICT advance rapidly often rendering existing
technology obsolete. It is therefore advisable that these capabilities are outsourced. Very large
organizations may develop some in-house technological capabilities, but even they would,
on occasions, have to take recourse to outsourcing. However, conceptualisation and subject
matter knowledge are best developed among the employees of an organization. Similarly,
it is advisable to develop the project management capabilities within an organization as it
leads to ownership of the project and hence better implementation.
Each government organization must carry out a capacity assessment and on that basis
the personnel of the organization should be trained. Each organization should prepare a
roadmap for enhancing the capabilities of its individuals as well as to develop organizational
capabilities.
DIT has taken the initiative to prepare Capacity Building Roadmaps (CBRMs) for all the
States which clearly identify the mechanisms/institutions, capacity building and training
needs and the means of fulfilling them along with the financial requirements. The Capacity
Building Guidelines for developing institutional mechanism was prepared by DIT in
consultation with the Planning Commission and was issued to all the State Governments
and UTs. These guidelines take cognizance of the fact that States are at different levels
of readiness for e-Goverriance and have different levels of aspirations. Capacity gaps are
therefore not viewed in an absolute context but relative to the goals set out by the respective
State Government for itself The capacity gaps that need to be addressed include engaging
experts, developing skills and imparting training. The Capacity Building Scheme is aimed
at addressing the above challenges in a holistic manner including support for creation of
State e-Governance Mission Teams (SeMT), and Project e-Governance Mission Teams
(PeMT).
The Commission would like to re-emphasise the importance of building in-house capacity
in government departments for the implementation of e-Governance projects. The first

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
step in this regard would be to make an assessment of present capacity levels followed by
preparation of a road map for enhancing these capabilities both in respect of employees and
organizations. Most States have well-established Administrative Training Institutes (ATls),
with adequate infrastructure for conducting training programmes for Government officials.
However, adequate focus is not being given to e-Governance as an important subject in
these institutions. Lack of experienced faculty in e-Governance is one of the main reasons.
It is possible and necessary to strengthen these institutions in the area of e-Governance.
This needs to be redressed by suitably strengthening ATls in this area.
Such institutional approaches apart, there is also need for learning from the successful
implementation of e-Governance programmes. For example, the Bhoomi project in
Karnataka showed how a well-defined training plan made a major contribution to project
success. Under a well-planned and well executed training programme, more than 10,000
government officials and over 700 village officials were trained on data preparation and
validation process extending to a period of 60 weeks. Similarly, the experience of Andhra
Pradesh shows that creation of adequate number of e-Champions by taking senior officers
through a 1O -week programme on e-Government is an important step in building a corpus
of trained government officers who can implement the e-Governance vision embodied in
the NeGP'
Along with capacity building efforts in Government, there is also a need to make the
people aware about the benefits of e-Governance and to make them more conversant with
technological interfaces introduced through e-Governance projects. The Commission, in
its earlier Reports, has also focused on generating awareness among the people, especially
the rural population for successful implementation of programmes. Thus, in its Second
Report entitled 'Unlocking Human Capital' (on the implementation ofNREGA) it had
recommended awareness generation programmes using All India Radio etc.
The Commission is of the view that a similar approach may be adopted in creating awareness
among the people with regard to e-Governance initiatives.
Developing Technological Solutions
Adopting/Developing the Right Technological Solution
Modern ICT helps in the governance process by providing a spectrum of technological
solutions. The rapid strides which have been made in development of Information and
Communications Technology in recent years have made a wide variety of technological
options available.

Promoting e-Governnance - The SMART ~y Forward
Different organizatio'ns have adopted different technological platforms and arrived at their
own solutions. These solutions have generally been developed in .isolation with very little
commonality or coordination. This has led to duplication of efforts on the one hand and
difficulty in networking among organizations on the other. There is need to address such
divergences so that successes are replicated across States and failures are eliminated. This calls
for formulation of norms for standardization and inter-operability at the national level.
The first task in this regard is the creation of a set of standards and policies, which would
describe the way in which different organizations would interact with each other. This is
generally known as an Inter-operability Framework.
The second task is to create an 'Enterprise Architecture Framework' which would identify
opportunities to simplify processes and unify work across the agencies and within the lines
of business of the Union and State Governments. The outcome of this effort will be a more
citizen-centered, customer-focused government that maximizes technology investments to
better achieve project outcomes.
EA is a management engineering discipline presenting a comprehensive view of the
enterprise, including strategic planning, organizational development, relationship
management, business process improvement, information and knowledge management,
and operations. The Architecture of an organization consists of models, diagrams, tables,
and narrative, which together translate the complexities of the agency into simplified yet
meaningful representations of how the agency operates (and intends to operate). EA provides
perspectives both for the enterprise's current or "as is" environment and for its target or "to
be" environment, as well as a sequencing plan that charts the journey between the two.
In the Indian context, e-Governance applications have already been introduced in many
government agencies. As these applications evolve and become more sophisticated, resulting
in fundamental process transformation, and as they extend beyond a single government
agency, their success will become more dependent on whether they are defined and
introduced within the context of enterprise architectures. At present, reforms are not based
on a systematic enterprise architecture. One reason for this state of affairs has been that top
managers in government organisations have not traditionally understood the purpose and
value of enterprise architectures, thus not giving them the priority attention they deserve
and require. The Commission recommends addressing these issues.
Implementation
A survey of all organizations having websites, reveals that the focus still is to provide static
information and here also the information which is displayed is what the organization
.11

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
feels impo,rtant rather that what the citizens want to know. It is, therefore, necessary to
carry out an independent evaluation of the type of information being displayed so that the
requirements of the citizens could be ascertained. This should be a periodic exercise.
Few sites have dynamic information. As far as transactional information is concerned,
this is limited to extremely few organizations. In order to make the websites useful to
citizens, it is necessary that organizations should gradually move from static information
to transactional information.
Furnishing transactional information may not be possible without back-end computerization
of processes, but ultimately computerisation of all back-end processes would result in
generation of transactional information in which the citizens are interested. Therefore,
to begin with, the transactional information may be off line which could be up-dated
at very short intervals, but at the same time, the process for computerizing all processes
should be taken up simultaneously and this should later on be linked to the information
dissemination system.
Implementing Complex e-Governance Projects
Implementation of complex e-Governance projects, is as complicated as the execution of
a major construction project. An e-Governance project has a large number of components
and each one of these has to be executed properly. There is a certain amount of sequencing
and synchronizing involved in carrying out these components. e-Governance projects
involve re-designing and installation of new processes, building of capabilities of hardware
and development of software. Each one of these, in turn, has several components which
would have to be performed in a proper order. The general experience has been that
comprehensive planning for execution for e-Governance projects is not done. Often, the
procurement of hardware is fast, but other components lag far behind. Further, it is also
seen that technological solution providers do not fully grasp the functioning of government
organisations while government functionaries have a poor grasp of technology. The ideal
situation would be to find a government functionary who is equally conversant with
technology and place him/her to manage implementation. Since this may not always
be possible, domain specialists need to work in close coordination with the technology
specialist.
The Commission is of the view that implementation of e-Governance projects would involve
a detailed 'project management' exercise which should consist of the following activities:
1) Breaking up the entire e-Governance projects into components/activities

Promoting e-Governnance - The SMART ~y Forward
2) Preparing an implementation plan
3) Allocating resources:
4) Commencement and continuous tracking
5) Mid-course correction
Change manageme~t: As e-Governance represents a paradigm shift in g~vernance reform,
government organizations and individuals would have to change their way of working
to be able to adapt to and accommodate these changes. This would require conducting a
change management exercise within organizations in order to adapt to perception of loss
of power, authority and discretion, inculcate faith in digital documents and develop a sense
of ownership in the projects.
Change Management has an organisational as well as a human angle and it needs to be handled
with utmost care. Change Management requirements vary widely across organisations and
across employees within an organisation. A systematic and measured approach is needed for
undertaking Change Management exercises as a necessary concomitant to process reforms,
adoption of technology and capacity building. It may often be desirable to take the services
of organisations with expertise in Change Management.
Monitoring and Evaluation
e-Governance projects need continuous monitoring. Such monitoring could be based on
a variety of parameters - financial viability, ease of use, assessment of in-house capacity,
volume of transactions, appropriateness of technological solutions, adequacy of business
process re-engineering, ability to handle difficult situations etc. The basic objective would
be to identify problems in a timely manner so that corrective measures could be taken. It
would also involve finding out the implementation status at any given point of time. Thus,
monitoring has to be done continuously by the implementing agencies.
The success or failure of e-Governance projects would depend on the achievement or
otherwise of the objectives which were set out initially. The evaluation of success or failure
of the project needs to be done by independent agencies in order to present a holistic and
objective picture. The parameters for such evaluation should be decided beforehand.
Institutional Framework for Coordination and Sharing ofR esources/Information
Government of India and a majority of State Governments have created Departments of
IT, however, there is need for clear distinction of the duties and responsibilities between

Repor.ts of the Administrive Reforms -Commission - A Summary
the respective DIT and the other Ministries/Organisations. DITs should undertake those
tasks that cannot be efficiently executed by other departments. It could also run or manage
certain common services and common infrastructure. Development and implementation
of solutions should however be left to the line departments. In order to bring clarity, the
following tasks may be entrusted to the respective DITs:
1) Conducting an e-preparedness audit for each organisation
2) Enforcing standardization
3) Assisting in co-ordination when e-Governance projects transcend an
organisation's functional domain
4) Facilitating capacity building by linking the user departments and the training
institutes (including academic and private sector institutions)
5) Carring out evaluation of e-Governance projects
6) Acting as a repository of best practices and encourage horizontal replication
in case of successful projects
7) Helping in selecting/developing the technological solution.
The Second Schedule to the Government of India Allocation of Business Rules, 1961
allocates inter alia the following business matters, in case of the Department of Information
Technology:
"(3) Assistance to other departments in the promotion of e-Governance, E-Commerce,
E-Medicine, E-Infrastructure etc."
The Commission is of the view that the business allocated to D IT may be made more
elaborate in case of e-Governance so as to include the tasks mentioned above.
The IT Departments at the Union and State Government levels should fun<;tion as
coordinating agencies for providing technological support, linkages and networking and
overall functioning of projects which have inter-agency involvement at different levels.
Public-Private Partnership (PPP)
The PPP model ofimplementation is more suitable for particular areas of e-Governance and
not to all. The criteria for PPP include long-term nature of demand for a service, profitability
and amenability to structuring a commercial framework and business model for PPP.

Promoting e-Governnance - The SMART wtzy Forward
Public-Private Partnership projects also pose several challenges which need to be understood
and addressed carefully. There is often lack of congruence in the objectives of the two
partners - government and the private sector. The success of PPP depends on the degree
to which the public and private sector partners align their efforts in achieving these
objectives. Clarity on objectives has to be achieved by both the parties at the outset. Also,
the organizational cultures in the private and public sector differ widely. This may result
in conflicting situations, since e-Governance involves substantial process reform needing
interaction between the partner company and the government agency or agencies in charge
of the 'domain'. It is necessary to create an appropriate coordination and review mechanism
that develops mutual trust and confidence. Also the agreements defining the mutual role
and responsibilities should be precisely drafted, following a transparent process of selection
of the private partner.
Protecting Critical Information Infrastructure Assets
The overall e-Governance infrastructure would in the end include national and state level
network systems, national and state level data centres, electronic service delivery gateways
and widespread service delivery centres across the country. Protecting the information
systems that support these critical information infrastructure assets from potential cyber
crimes is one of the serious challenges currently facing the government. In addition, as
greater amounts of money get transferred through e-Governance systems, and more sensitive
economic and commercial information is exchanged electronically, it increases the likelihood
of information attacks threatening vital national interests. Therefore, there is need for
development of defence mechanisms and a legal system that is capable of addressing these
issues. This should be supplemented by institutionalizing early warning systems to enable
timely counter measures.
NATIONAL e-GOVERNANCE PLAN
In Chapter 6, the Commission has already recommended that the Departments of
Information Technology at the Union and State Government levels should provide
institutional support to other departments and organizations at the appropriate level in
implementation of e-Governance projects identified and conceptualized by them (paragraph
6.9.5). The Commission re-iterates these recommendations.
The Common Support Infrastructure
State Data Centre (SDC)
State Data Centres have been identified as one of the important elements of the core
infrastructure for supporting e-Governance initiatives under NeGP' These would consolidate

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
services, applications and infrastructure to provide efficient electronic delivery of G2G,
G2Cand G2Bservices through common delivery platform seamlessly supported by the
State Wide Area Network (SWAN) connecting up to the villages through the Common
Service Centres (CSCs). Its key functions would be to act as the Central Repository of the
State, provide secure data storage, disaster recovery and remote management functions
etc. The DIT has already provided the 'Guidelines for Technical and Financial Support
for Establishment of State Data Centre'82 which offer two options before the States: (a)
the State/UT and NICtogether form a composite team for the State Data Centre, where
the NIC team would provide services for infrastructure upkeep, operations etc.; (b) the
capabilities of existing commercial internet data centres are leveraged. The Scheme was
approved in January 2008 and so far, all the 23 States whose proposals have been approved
till now, have opted for the first option.
The Commission is of the view that owing to the nature of data and security concerns,
the implementation of SDCs should lie in the domain of government agencies such as
NIC. Further, all state-level data centres should be subsumed in the SDCs. Due to the
interlinked nature of the core components of NeGP such as SDCs, SWANs and CSCs,
implementation of these projects should be co-ordinated in a way that there is no time lag
in their operationalisation.
State Wide Area Network (SWAN)
This is aimed at establishing Wide Area Networks in all States and UTs across the country,
from the Headquarter of each State/UT to the Blocks. It would serve in providing G2G
and G2C services, especially for the various Mission Mode Projects contemplated under
the National e-Governance Plan. Various other NeGP initiatives of the Department of IT,
namely, e-District, State Data Centre, CSC, India Portal, Unique ID etc. would be directly
using these Wide Area Networks in addition to all other G2G and G2Cinitiatives being
taken at the Union and State levels. Implementation of the SWAN Scheme is in full swing
across the country.
The Standing Committee on Information Technology, found that the time limit for
implementing the SWAN was continuously being extended. Further, they were also
informed that 'at the implementation level also the States/UTs are facing problems of
availability of basic telecom infrastructure at the block level'. The Commission is of the
view that the highest priority needs to be given to the simultaneous roll out of SWAN
across the country so that the MMPs and other e-Governance initiatives, which would ride --.
on this network, can also be expeditiously implemented.

Promoting e-Governnance - The SMART ~y Forward
Common Service Centres (CSCs)
The Common Service Centre Scheme is one of the three important infrastructural initiatives
of the NeGP, the other two being (a) the State Wide Area Network (for connectivity)
and (b) the State Data Centre Scheme (for secure hosting of data and applications). This
scheme aims at establishing about 100,000 Common Services Centres across the country,
one each for every six census villages. The objective is to develop a platform that can enable
government, private and social sector organizations to align their social and commercial
goals for the benefit of the rural population in the remotest corners of the country through
a combination of IT-based as well as non-IT-based services. The placement of a CSC in a
cluster of villages is supposed to follow a 'honey comb' structure so that the services provided
by it are easily accessible to the rural population residing in the cluster. The Scheme is
being implemented as a Public-Private Partnership (PPP). The Common Service Centres
are designed as ICT-enabled Kiosks having a PC along with basic support equipment like
printer, scanner and UPS.
The Commission has considered the various issues that arise. It agrees with the view that the
CSCs need to be monitored by the local governments, especially during the first four years
of operation when they are receiving revenue support for provision of G2Cservices. The
Gram Panchayats should also make the people aware about the services made available by
the CSCs and encourage them to utilize these services. State Governments should also see
to it that an ever expanding bouquet of G2Cservices is made available through the CSCs.
Further, it is also of the view that the CSCs are not a substitute for enabling the Panchayats
in providing e-Governance solutions to rural population. The last mile connectivity achieved
in case of CSCs should also be utilized to establish panchayat based kiosks. Also, as the
CSCmodel is based on user charges, it may not be very effective in providing services
to persons below the poverty line and other disadvantaged sections of rural society. The
Commission has already recommended in its Report on 'Local Governance':
• Local governments should become one point service centres for providing various
web-based and satellite-based services. This would, however, require capacity
building in the local governments.
• Steps should be taken to set up Information and Communication Technology
(lCT) and Space Technology enabled Resource Centres at the Village and
Intermediate Panchayat levels for local resource mapping and generation of local
information base. These Resource Centres should also be used for documenting
local traditional knowledge and heritage.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Thus, the Commission is of the view that the MMP on Gram Panchayats should be
formulated in a way that it includes these aspects and is implemented with a focused
approach. The development of related capacities, such as rural electrification and rural road
networks should accompany its implementation.
Mission Mode Projects
The Mission Mode Projects have the potential of creating a direct impact on citizens. Often
these are sectors where the citizens' interaction with the Government produces maximum
dissatisfaction and grievances. Unfortunately, these are the very sectors where progress
in implementation in NeGP is lagging. There has been an absence of a clear strategy for
governance reforms based on the development of a road-map for major e-Governance
projects. Poor progress is due to a variety of factors including the volume and breadth of
the transactions involved, prevalence of outdated and cumbersome procedures, inertia and
resistance to change, the overhang of old and outdated records, inadequate attention to
BPR and lack of clear demarcation of responsibility of the project authorities.
Most of the State level e-Governance projects under NeGP are still at the conceptual stage.
The Union and State Governments have not been able to give momentum to these projects
despite their best efforts. The Commission is of the view that many of these projects have
pre-maturely gone ahead with the ICT component of the project without first prioritizing
the governance reforms that are a pre-requisite for these projects. This would result in
automation of the existing inefficiencies in the system. As mentioned earlier, the success
of all these projects is heavily dependant on a radical overhaul of the existing systems
and procedures. These projects also seem to suffer from absence of clear-cut division
of responsibility and accountability as well as inadequate empowerment of the project
management authorities.
Analysis ofS ome Mission Mode Projects
Efforts for computerization of land records have been on-going for more than a decade.
There has been some success in a few States. But this is limited to 'textual computerisation' of
existing records. This by no standards is a mean achievement, as it has brought in transparency
and improved accessibility to land records. However, two major problems remain. Firstly,
the maps in use are totally outdated and secondly, the titles indicated in relation to the land
are not up-to-date. Sometimes, the time lag is more than a generation.
These two basic problems would need to be addressed on a priority basis. Modern technology
can be of assistance in quickly carrying out the measurements ofland and this does constitute

way
Promoting e-Governnance - 1he SMART Forward
an important part of NeGP' But, unless mechanisms are put in place to ensure that any
change in titles is quickly captured by the land records, any amount of leT would not
provide optimal solutions. Therefore, the existing mechanism for updating land records
would have to be analysed, improved and strengthened so that henceforth all transactions
in titles are executed in the land records immediately.
NeGP focuses on integration of Registration with the Record of Right. But this by itself
will not be sufficient, as a large number of changes in titles of land occurs through other
means - namely, succession, will, partition, gift, survivorship etc. Therefore, any land record
system should be able to detect such transactions and accordingly update the records.
Also, there are bound to be disputes where land titles are concerned. All State land records
laws provide for a dispute resolution mechanism - the revenue courts. Over time, the
functioning of this mechanism has left much to be desired. There is urgent need to build
the capability of this mechanism.
While the above discussion is concerned with lands lying in rural areas, in case of urban
lands, the situation is graver as records are virtually non-existent. The NLRMP does not
cover urban lands and properties. In fact, these are also not covered under the ]NNURM.
Growth in urbanization would result in continuous conversion of rural land into urban
land. Thus, there cannot be two systems for management of rural and urban lands. However,
the computerization and management of urban land records taken together with survey
operations would pose challenges which would require devoting substantial human and
financial resources along with making changes in processes and statutes. Thus, there is a
pressing need for a de novo exercise in carrying out surveys and measurements in urban
areas and devising a suitable system for titles.
The Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) now aims to nearly quadruple the number of
passport counters to 1,250 from the current 345 and bring the entire process of issuing
travel documents online. As many as 77 fully computerised new Passport facilitation centres
would be opened across the country.
For any e-Governance initiative to succeed, there is need for identification of processes
involved in providing any service, analysis of the validity of these processes and associated
forms and re-engineering of these process keeping the concerns of simplicity and security in
mind. In the case of passports, the lise of biometrics for identification and digital photographs
etc. (in the absence of unique national identity card), online payment, online application and
tracking system etc. were activities which could have been identified earlier for inclusion in
the e-Governance initiative. As the verification part is dependent on another organization

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
and database, only when the records of the police organization are computerized, made
up-to-date and online would the process be further expedited.
The processes which precede and follow the police verification phase need to be re-engineered
and put in e-Governance mode immediately. While the ultimate goal of this exercise should
be integration with computerized and online police systems and citizen identification
database, pending such integration the police verification exercise may be streamlined and
made time-bound.
Creation of a separate unique identity card system would only be useful if it is exhaustive,
accurate and tamper proof. This would require creation of a database that links an individual
to unique identifier which remains constant over his life time. Such identifiers may include
parameters such as an individual parentage, date of birth, place of birth etc. In addition, the
unique ID may capture other parameters such as place of residence, occupation, educational
qualification etc. which are likely to change over the lifetime of an individual. Ideally, the
unique ID should be based on a parameter that remains constant and which gets activated
at the time of birth itself. At the age of 18, this card can automatically be activated as a voter
identity card which would need to be extinguished after the death of the individual. This
would mean that the panchayats and urban local bodies would need to playa proactive role
in every hamlet, village and urban centre of the country in order to, without fail, account
for every live birth and every death taking place within their jurisdiction and initiate the
process of acquisition of a unique identity as also its extinguishing. This would, in turn,
require equipping the local governments with the necessary capabilities for ensuring 100
per cent registration of all births and deaths in their jurisdictions. The Commission would
therefore suggest that the newly created Unique ID Authority should take these aspects into
account in order to develop an accurate and fool-proof unique identity card system for all
Indian citizens. To start the process immediately, it may be desirable to give unique IDs
prospectively for all future births that take place in the country. As the system stabilises,
this could then be extended to all citizens in a phase manner.
LEGAL FRAMEWORK FOR e-GOVERNANCE
The Information Technology Act, 2000 was enacted to "... provide legal recognition
for transactions carried out by means of electronic data interchange and other means of
electronic communication, commonly referred to as "electronic commerce", which involve
the use of alternatives to paper-based methods of communication and storage of information,
to facilitate electronic filing of documents with the Government agencies and further to
amend the Indian Penal Code, the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, the Bankers' Books Evidence
Act, 1891 and the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto."

Promoting e-Governnance - The SMART way Forward
The focus of this Act is on electronic commerce and electronic records. The Act contains
provisions on digital signatures and authentication of electronic records, legal recognition
of digital signatures and electronic records, retention of electronic records, attribution,
acknowledgement and dispatch of electronic records, security of electronic records,
regulation of Certifying Authorities, Cyber Regulation Appellate Tribunal etc. To facilitate
the implementation of e-Governance projects at various levels across the country, a more
holistic legal framework is required.
The Commission is of the view that a clear road map with a set of milestones should be
-outlined by Government of India with the ultimate objective of transforming the citizen
government interface at all levels to the e-Governance mode by 2020.
e-Governance in India does not yet have a separate enabling legal framework. The scope of
NeGP is very wide covering almost all aspects of governance -right from delivery of services
and provision of information to business process re-engineering within the different levels
of government and its institutions. Thus, its task is of mammoth proportion. It would
therefore be advisable if such a gigantic task is implemented, monitored and regulated
through a legal framework so that its vision becomes a reality.
The Commission is of the view that components of the NeGP may be enshrined in a legal
framework. The purpose would be to give statutory mandate to the institutional entities,
setting up of a separate Fund, defining responsibilities and providing for time frames and
oversight mechanisms. Thus, this legislation may, inter alia, contain provisions regarding
the following:
• Definition of e-Governance in the Indian context, its objectives and role
• Coordination and oversight mechanisms, support structures at various levels, their
functions and responsibilities
• Role, functions and responsibilities of government organizations at various
levels
• Mechanism for financial arrangements including public-private partnership
• Specifying the requirements of a strategic control framework for e-Government
projects dealing with statutory and sovereign functions of the government
• Responsibility for selection and adoption of standards and inter-operability
framework
• Framework for digital security and data protection etc.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Such legislation should be in the nature of an overarching framework and avoid going
into micro-details. The Commission is of the view that this law should provide ample
flexibility to organizations and support subordinate delegation as conceptualization and
implementation of e-Governance initiatives and business process reengineering in different
organizations would throw up myriad problems which would need adopting a wide variety
of approaches to arrive at solutions.
KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT
Promoting KM in Government
Knowledge Management is essentially about facilitating the processes by which knowledge
is created, shared and used in organizations. It is not about setting up a new department
or getting in a new technology. It is about making changes to the way individuals in
organisations function. There are many ways of looking at Knowledge Management
and different organizations will take different approaches. Generally speaking, creating
a knowledge environment usually requires changing organizational values and culture,
changing people's behaviours and work patterns, and providing people with easy access to
each other and to relevant information resources.
The Commission is of the view that Knowledge Management is central to governance
reforms in general and e-Governance reforms in particular. Therefore, the Union and the
State Governments should take proactive steps in establishing Knowledge Management
systems as a pivotal step in the implementation of e-Governance initiatives.

CITIZEN CENTRIC ADMINISTRATION
- 1he Heart ofG overnance
Introduction
The Second Administrative Reforms Commission (ARC) was set up with a wide mandate to
prepare a blue print for revamping the public administration system and to suggest measures
to achieve a pro-active, responsive, accountable, sustainable and efficient administration
for the country at all levels of government.
Governance in order to be citizen centric should be participative and transparent. It should
be effective, efficient and responsive to the citizens. Furthermore, an ethos of serving the
citizens should permeate all government organizations. Last but not the least, government
organisations should be accountable to the people. As one of the primary functions of
the State is to promote the welfare of its citizens, an evaluation of the functioning of the
institutions of governance will ultimately have to be based on the satisfaction they provide
to the common man. In this regard, prominence would need to be attached to the voice
of the citizens themselves.
THE CONCEPT OF CITIZEN CENTRIC ADMINISTRATION
Good Governance and Citizen Cf(ntric Administration
The concept of good governance is not new. Kautilya in his treatise Arthashastra elaborated
the traits of the king of a well governed State thus: "in the happiness of his subjects lies
his happiness, in their welfare his welfare, whatever pleases himself, he does not consider
as good, but whatever pleases his subjects he considers as good". Mahatma Gandhi had
propounded the concept of 'Su-raj'.
Good governance aims at providing an environment in which all citizens irrespective of
class, caste and gender can develop to their full potential. In addition, good governance
also aims at providing public services effectively, efficiently and equitably to the citizens.
The 4 pillars on which the edifice of good governance rests, in essence are:

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
• Ethos (of service to the citizen),
• Ethics (honesty, integrity and transparency),
• Equity (treating all citizens alike with empathy for the weaker sections), and
• Efficiency (speedy and effective delivery of service without harassment and using
ICT increasingly).
Citizens are thus at the core of good governance. Therefore, good governance and citizen
centric administration are inextrica~ly linked.
Necessary Pre-conditions for Good Governance
An analysis of the barriers to good governance reveals that there are several pre-conditions
which must be fulfilled in order to make governance citizen centric. Some of the pre
conditions are:
a. Sound legal framework.
b. Robust institutional mechanism for proper implementation of the laws and
their effective functioning.
c. Competent personnel staffing these institutions; and sound personnel
management policies.
d. Right policies for decentralization, delegation and accountability.
Besides, a number of tools can also be employed to make administration citizen centric.
These are:
a. Re-engineering processes to make governance (citizen centric'.
b. Adoption of appropriate modern technology.
c. Right to information.
d. Citizens' charters.
e. Independent evaluation of services.
£ Grievance, redressal mechanisms.
g. Active citizens' participation - public-private partnerships.

Citizen Centric Administration - The Heart of Governance \,
FUNCTIONS OF GOVERNMENT
Functions of Government
The Constitution of India lays down the roles and functions of the three levels of government
- Union, State and Local. These are spelt out in Part IlIon Fundamental Rights, Part IV
on the Directive Principles of State Policy, Parts IX and IX A on Local Bodies, etc. These
could be broadly categorized as follows:
a. Regulatory functions
b. Service providing functions
c. Developmental functions.
Regulatory Functions
The Commission in its Report on "Local Governance", examined the issue of regulatory
functions carried out by the local bodies and observed that all regulatory functions should
adhere to five principles - simplification, transparency, objectivity, convergence and speedy
disposal.
The Commission would like to reiterate that the principles enunciated in the context oflocal
governments would also be applicable to all regulatory activities. Besides, the Commission
would emphasise the following aspects of regulation:
a. Regulation only where necessary:
b. Regulation to be effective:
c. Self regulation is the best form of regulation:
d. Regulatory pra'cedures to be simple, transparent and citizen friendly:
e. Involving citizens' groups, professional organizations in the regulation
activities:
Service-Providing Functions
Government provides a variety of services to citizens ranging from social services like
education and health to infrastructural services like power, road, transport and water etc.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms'Commission - A Summary
The Commission in its Report on "Local Governance" has examined the issue of service
delivery, particularly health and education and has made specific recommendations:
The Commission would like to reiterate its recommendations on this issue. As far as
infrastructure services are' ~oncerned, Government agencies have traditionally been
responsible for these services si"nce these were considered natural monopolies. However,
there is'n ow an increasing trend towards privatization of many of these services in order
to ensure greater efficiency, competition as well as accountability. Privatization of power
distribution in several Indian cities including Delhi reflects this trend. Whether these services
are provided by Government or private agencies, there is need to ensure greater efficiency
and accountability to the citizens. Ensuring full cost recovery, effective implementation
of Citizens' Charters, feedback mechanisms from citizens' groups and public-private
partnership are some of the mechanisms to meet these objectives.
Single Window System for Delivery ofS ervices
One of the ways in which governments across the world have approached efficient and
effective service delivery to citizens (and businesses) is by adopting a 'single window
system'. The driving force behind this approach is'the belief that citizens need not run
around different government offices for getting various services. This is achieved through
a number of ways. One approach allows a service providing organization to re-engineer its
processes in such a way that all the services provided by it get delivered to citizens through
a single outlet/unit. Another approach is to establish an organization which would create an
infrastructure through which different government organizations are able to provide services
to citizens at a single point of delivery. Some governments have adopted an approach where
no separate organization is created - all the organizations work in tandem to establish a
common service delivery infrastructure.
Information and Communications Technology (lCT) has enabled governments and their
different units to provide information and deliver services to citizens in a faster, more efficient
and transparent manner. In fact, different governments are now providing a web-enabled
single window interface for all governmental organizations. In India, the National Portal
(http://india.gov.in) provides an interface to a large number of governmen~ organizations
at the Union and State levels.
Similarly, State Governments have constituted Single Window Agencies, especially for
grant of industrial clearances. These Single Window Agencies have nominees of all the
departments concerned. It has been observed that these agencies, many a time, give only 'in
principle approval' and the applicant has then to seek formal approvals from each agency.

Citizen Centric Administration - the Heart of Governance
Thus, there is need to sufficiently empower these 'single window' agencies to enable them
to provide relevant services. However, it needs to be recognized that though the 'single
window' approach is a simple concept, its implementation requires thorough business
process re-engineering in government organizations, aided by the use of lCT.
Developmental Functions of Government
Government implements a large number of welfare and development programmes for
promoting the socio-economic upliftment of its citizens. These include programmes for
poverty alleviation, employment generation schemes, schemes to strengthen infrastructure,
measures for the welfare of weaker sections of society, programmes to improve the health
and nutritional status of citizens etc. These programmes are implemented largely by the
State Governments through their machinery and through Local Governments. Each
one of these programmes has its specific features and guidelines. The Commission in its
Second Report examined in detail the issues regarding implementation of the National
Rural Employment Guarantee Act (NREGA) and made comprehensive recommendation
for effective implementation of this law. Without going into specific details of the other
important programmes of Government, the Commission would like to suggest that the
principle of subsidarity should be adopted in implementing various programmes. While
doing so, citizens should be involved in all stages of these programmes and social audit
should be made mandatory for all developmental programmes.
CITIZENS' CHARTERS
Introduction
The Citizens' Charter is an instrument which seeks to make an organization transparent,
accountable and citizen friendly. A Citizens' Charter is basically a set of commitments
made by an organization regarding the standards of service which it delivers. Every citizens'
charter has several essential components to make it meaningful; the first being the Vision
and Mission Statement of the organization. This gives the outcomes desired and the broad
strategy to achieve these goals and outcomes. This also makes the users aware of the intent
of their service provider and helps in holding the organization accountable. Secondly, in
its Citizens' Charter, the organization must state clearly what subjects it deals with and
the service areas it broadly covers. This helps the users to understand the type of services
they can expect from a particular service provider. These commitments/promises constitute
the heart of a citizens' charter. Even though these promises are not enforceable in a court
of law, each organization should ensure that the promises made are kept and, in case of
default, a suitable compensatorylremedial mechanism should be provided. Thirdly, the

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Citizens' Charter should also stipulate the responsibilities of the citizens in the context of
the charter.
Making Citizens' Charters Effective - An Agenda for Reform *
The Commission has briefly dealt with the issue of Citizens' Charters in its Fourth Report
on 'Ethics in Governance'. The Commission observed that in order to make these Charters
effective tools for holding public servants accountable, the Charters should clearly spell
out the remedy/penalty/compensation in case there is a default in meeting the standards
spelt out in the Charter. It emphasized that it is better to have a few promises which can
be kept than a long list of lofty but impractical aspirations.
i. Internal restructuring should precede Charter formulation:
ii. One size does not fit all:
111. Wide consultation process:
iv. Firm commitments to be made:
v. Redressal mechanism in case of default:
VI. Periodic evaluation of Citizens' Charters:
V11. Benchmark using end-user feedback:
viii. Hold officers accountable for results:
ix. Include civil society in the process:
A New Approach for Making Organizations Citizen Centric
The Commission recognizes that a Citizens' Charter cannot be an end in itself, it is rather
a means to an end - a tool to ensure that the citizen is always at the heart of any service
delivery mechanism. The IS 15700:2005 of the Bureau of Indian Standards is an Indian
Standard for Quality Management Systems. The Standard itself stipulates that a Quality
Management System helps an organization to build systems which enable it to provide
quality service consistently and is not a subs!:itute for 'service standards'. In fact, they are
complementary to each other. The Sevottam model seeks to assess an organization on (i)
implementation of the Citizens' Charter, (ii) implementation of grievances redressal system
and (iii) service delivery capability.

Citizen Centric Administration - The Heart of Governance
The Sevottam model is in the take off stage. The Commission is of the view that a model to
make administration citizen centric should be easy to understand both by the citizens and
the organizations. Therefore, prescribing a rigid model and implementing it, following a
top-down approach is not always the best option. Since the maximum interaction of citizens
takes place with field formations, it is necessary that reforms for enshrining a citizens' centric
administration take place at that level rather than following a trickle down approach by
concentrating on reforms at the apex level. The Commission during its visit to various States
and organisations met citizens who observed that the large number of reforms carried out
at Headquarters do not trickle down to the cutting edge level and therefore the real benefits
do not flow down to large number of citizens. Examples most often cited, pertain to lack
of citizen centric reforms at the village level because of which Patwaris and other officials,
continue to be indifferent and corrupt.
The ARC Seven Step Model for Citizen Centricity
This model draws from the principles of the IS 15700:2005, the Sevottam model and the
Customer Service Excellence Model of the UK. Each organization should follow a step
by-step approach which would help it in becoming increasingly more citizen-centric. This
approach should be followed not only by the top management but also by each unit of the
organization that has a public interface. The top management has the dual responsibility
of setting standards for itself as well as guiding the subordinate offices in setting their
own standards. Besides, all supervisory levels should ensure that the standards set by the
subordinate offices are realistic and are in synergy with the broad organizational goals. Thus,
though each office would have the autonomy to set standards, these would have to be in
consonance with the organizational policies.
a. Define all services which you provide and identify your clients.
b. Set standards and norms for each service.
c. Develop capability to meet the set standards.
d. Perform to achieve the standards
e. Monitor performance against the set standards.
f. Evaluate the impact through an independent mechanism.
g. Continuous improvement based on monitoring and evaluation results.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
CITIZENS' PARTICIPATION IN ADMINISTRATION
Peoples' Participation in Governance
Mechanisms for citizens' participatiori in governance could be conceptualized in the
following main forms:
i) Citizens seeking information;
ii) Citizens giving suggestions;
iii) Citizens demanding better services;
iv) Citizens holding service providers and other government agencies' accountable;
and
v) Active citizens' participation in administration/decision making.
Citizens Seeking Information
The Commission in its First Report on the 'Right to Information Act' has already given
detailed recommendations on the improvements needed in the implementation of the Right
to Information Act to fully achieve its objectives. Those recommendations are reiterated
here as being critical to encouraging citizens' participation in governance.
Citizens Giving Suggestions
Suggestions of citizens can be of great help both at the level of policy making and
implementation since citizens are in the best position to indicate their priorities and the
possible solutions. While no uniform model for receiving the suggestions of citizens or
holding consultations can he suggested, the Commission feels that it should be mandatory
for all government organizations to develop a suitable mechanism for this purpose which
could range from the simple 'Suggestion Box' to regular consultations with citizens' groups.
The Heads of the concerned organizations should ensure rigorous follow up action on the
suggestions received so that these become a meaningful exercise. The Commission also feels
that a system of incentives and rewards should be introduced so that suggestions that lead
to significant improvement or savings can be acknowledged.
Citizens Demanding Better Services
The efficiency of a government organization is best judged by its responsiveness to
complaints/ demands from its clients. The Commission is of the view that every government

Citizen Centric Administration - The Heart of Governance
organization must ensure the following: (i) a fool-proof system for registration of all
complaints, (ii) a prescribed time schedule for response and resolution, and (iii) a monitoring
and evaluation mechanism to ensure that the norms prescribed are complied with. Use of
information technology tools can help to make such a system more accessible for citizens.
The Commission feels that the heads of all government organizations should be made
responsible for ensuring the development of such a system for responding to the complaints
of citizens, on a time bound basis.
Citizens Holding Service Providers and Government Agencies Accountable
Citizens should be given the opportunity to rate the services provided by government
organizations, on a periodic basis. Regular citizens' feedback and survey and citizens report
cards should therefore be evolved by all departments for this purpose. This would not only
give a voice to the citizens but also enable the agencies concerned to judge satisfaction
ratings and the need for improvement.
Encouraging Citizens' Participation
The Commission feels that while no single modality or mechanism can be prescribed
for encouraging citizens' participation in governance; in general, there is need to create
institutionalized mechanisms for encouraging their participation in governance across public
agencies at all levels and, for this to happen, the following steps are necessary:
a) A comprehensive review of policy and practice in each department/public
agency:
b) Modifying administrative procedures where necessary:
c) Entrustment of the function of institutionalizing citizens' participation in
gover ance 0 a senior evel officer:
d) Performa ce management reviews to incorporate effectiveness in ensuring
citizens' par patio in overnance:
Enabling Womens Participation
Because of ocio-cu tural mores and sec usion norms, women in many parts of our country
find it more difficult to approach and access government offices/services. This gender
perspective must e kept in mind by all government authorities and agencies while ensuring
participatiOl of citizens ' n governance as discussed in earlier paragraphs. This will imply

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
that special measures and mechanisms including in its Citizens' Charters will be required
to obtain inputs, suggestions and participation of women in government's policies and
programmes. This is particularly important since women are the focus of many of our
socio-economic programmes and are also the prime users of resources like water, etc.,
particularly in rural areas. Encouraging full participation of women as a part of citizen
centric administration and obtaining their feedback will ensure that their suggestions
and perspectives based on ground realities are adequately reflected in various policies and
programmes including in grievance redressal and other mechanisms.
The Physically Challenged
There is a general perception that a large proportion of the physically challenged are not
even aware of their entitlements. It is estimated that only about 220/0 of the total population
of these are in possession of the prescribed disabilities certificate. The Commission is of
the view that 1000/0 registration of all persons of disabilities must become a reality because
this would, inter alia, ensure early detection as well as appropriate remedial actions to
ameliorate the hardship of the physically challenged and ensure that their entitlements are
generally available to all who need them. This would require government to adopt a proactive
approach for detection and registration of the physically challenged persons. This could
be done by giving the responsibility to the Primary Health Centres (PHCs) to identify all
such cases in their jurisdiction and to get the evaluation of the disabilities done. It should
also be mandated that Anganvadi Workers, and Auxiliary Nurse Midwives (ANMs) should
report cases of suspected disability to the concerned PHC. Thereafter, it should be the
responsibility of the Medical Officer of the PHC to examine the case and ifit is within his/
her competence, issue the disability certificate. In case, an opinion of a specialist is required
he/s he should consult the District Medical Officer and arrange for the same.
This would however, require placing adequate resources at the disposal of the PHC Medical
Officer, delegation of commensurate authority and changes in the relevant rules for this
purpose. Simultaneously, steps should be taken to create a database for all the Disabilities
Certificate holders with integration at District, State and National levels.
DECENTRALISATION AND DELEGATION
The Commission is of the view that there is a general perception that many government
organizations have a tendency to hold back authority at higher levels and instances of
top policy makers indulging in micro-management of routine matters are common in
government organisations. This could lead to inefficient and time consuming decision
making processes and can in fact render the entire administration non-citizen centric. It is

Citizen Centric Administration - The Heart of Governance
therefore necessary that an exercise should be carried out within each organization to assess
whether adequate delegation of authority has been done. If required, external expertise can
be sought. The principle of subsidiarity should be followed while deciding on the extent of
delegation. It should be clearly enunciated that the top echelons in any organization should
essentially deal with policy making functions and the field organizations should deal with
operational aspects.
The extent to which delegated powers is used or is allowed to be used, should be two of the
elements while appraising an officer's overall performance.
GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL MECHANISM
A Strong Internal Grievance Redressal Mechanism
From the existence of a large number of external bodies which have been constituted for
redressal of grievances, it is evident that the internal public grievance redressal mechanism
has not functioned effectively. Though elaborate guidelines have been issued by the
Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances, there has been inadequate
compliance. In view of this, the Standing Committee of Parliament recommended that the
public grievances mechanism should be backed by a law similar to the Right to Information
(RTI) Act, 2005 which would ensure that public grievances are given the attention that they
deserve. The basic features of the RTI Act were: (a) it clearly defined the right of citizens
to obtain information from the public authorities, (b) establishing well defined points of
contact for seeking information - PIO, (c) mandated that departments should suo-motu
declare specified information, (d) stipulating a time frame within which the information
has to be furnished to the applicant, (e) set up an internal appellant mechanism, and (f)
constituted an independent appellant mechanism with the powers to issue directions and
even impose fines.
The Commission is of the view that when it comes to public grievances, some principles of
the RTI initiative may be adopted. However, public grievances cover a wide range of issues
and problems ranging from simple complaints regarding red-tapism, corruption and delays
to major demands for provision of physical and social infrastructure.
Grievances could thus be categorized into three broad groups - (i) grievances arising out
of abuse of office and corruption on the part of public functionaries, (ii) grievances arising
out of systemic deficiencies within an organization, and (iii) grievances arising from non
fulfillment of needs/ demands. While the first category is amenable to statutory intervention
similar to those embodied in the RTI Act, the second and the third categories may require

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
internal reforms, organizational capacity building and even substantial budgetary allocations.
Statutory mechanisms already exist to deal with the first category of grievances. Moreover,
the.Commis~ion has recommended the creation of a Local Body Ombudsman in its Sixth
Report. The Commission is of the view that since budgetary allocations are a legislative
process, setting up an external mechanism as under the RTI Act, with powers to issue
directions on such issues would interfere with the resource allocations process which is
approved by the legislature. Moreover, setting up of an external appellate authority with
powers to issue directions, by means of a law, may lead to proliferation oflitigation, convert
the grievance redressal process into a legalistic exercise and may even create a turf war with
the existing judicial and statutory mechanisms. Public grievances which emanate out of
systemic deficiencies, or those which are in the nature of requests or demands are best
handled through providing a strong internal grievance redressal mechanism, transparency
in use of resources and reforming internal processes. Therefore, there is no doubt that the
internal public grievance mechanism needs to be much more effective and efficient both
in terms of its reach and functions. The Commission feels that this can best be achieved
in the following manner:
(i) The Union and the State Governments should issue directions asking all public
authorities to designate public grievance officers on the lines of the Public
Information Officers specified under the RTI Act. These officers should be of
adequate seniority and be delegated commensurate authority.
(ii) All grievance petitions should be satisfactorily disposed off by these officers
within thirty days. Non-adherence to the time limit should invite financial
penalties.
(iii) Each organization should also designate an appellate authority and devolve
adequate powers upon them including the power to impose fines on the
defaulting officers.
Analysis and Identification of Grievance Prone Areas
Every year, government organizations at the Union and State levels receive a large number
of petitions for redressal of grievances from the public. While evolving a robust internal
mechanism to deal with these grievances and simplifying processes for better service
delivery would form the backbone of an efficient grievance redressal system in government
organizations, the main focus of such a system should be to ensure that consequently the
number of grievances actually get reduced.

Citizen Centric Administration - The Heart of Governance
In order to eliminate the underlying causes that lead to pt,tblic. grievances, government
organizations would have to be proactively engaged in a rigorous and periodic exercise
towards analyzing the nature of grievances received by them. Thus, grievances would have
to be identified, correlated and linked with different processes involved in the functioning
of both the organization and its various units/functionaries. This would provide a clear
mapping of public grievances based on both functions and functionaries. In mapping the
nature and origin of grievances, internal resources may be augmented by taking assistance
of public opinion and external advice. Once th~ mapping is done, It would be easy to
identify the grievance prone areas, processes, functions and ':lnits/functio;'1aries within
the organization. This should lead to devising and taking corrective measures in order to
eliminate the reason for generation of grievances - both in numbers and magnitude. The
Commission is of the view that this exercise should be carried out at regular intervals so
as to keep a constant vigil on the source areas of generation of grievances and accordingly
take steps to rectify these.
CONSUMER PROTECTION
The Consumer Protection Act
The welfare role of the State is of considerable importance and therefore various measures
to ensure the welfare -safety, security and well being -of its citizens are essential. However,
citizens rely on the open market for most of their purchases - particularly, goods and also
increasingly, of services and the asymmetry between the consumers of goods and services
and the producers of these goods and services in terms of knowledge, bargaining power
etc. necessitates State intervention. This has resulted in setting up of consumer protection
mechanisms. The Consumer Protection Act was passed in 1986 to protect the interests
of the consumers. The objective of this law is to provide a simple, fast and inexpensive
mechanism to the citizens to redress their grievances in specified cases. The Act envisages
a three-tier quasi-judicial machinery at the National, State and District levels; (i) National
Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission - known as "National Commission", (ii) State
Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission known as "State Commission" and (iii) District
Consumer Disputes Redressal Forum - known as "District Forum". The Act also provides
for establishment of Consumer Protection Councils at the Union, State and District levels,
whose main objectives are to promote and protect the rights of consumers.
Other Laws which Seek to Protect Consumers' Interests
Apart from the Consumer Protection Act, 1986, there are a large number .of laws - both
Union and State - as well as regulations whose objective is to prot~ct the interests of the
citizens' - safety, security, health, hygiene etc. Some of these laws are:

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
a. Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954.
b. Essential Commodities Act and Rules thereunder.
c. The Standards of Weights and Measures Act, 1976 and The Standards of
Weights and Measures (Enforcement) Act, 1985.
d. Rules and Regulations and Bye Laws under the Municipal Acts of the States.
e. The Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, The Drugs and Magic Remedies
(Objectionable Advertisement) Act, 1954, The Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances Act, 1985, The Medicinal and Toilet Preparations (Excise Duties)
Act, 1956, The Drugs (Prices Control) Order, 1995 (under the Essential
Commodities Act).
f. Mandatory Certification Scheme of Bureau of Indian Standards under various
laws.
g. The Cinematograph Act, 1952.
The modalities prescribed under each one of these laws is different but the general underlying
principle is that a licensinglregistration procedure has been prescribed in each one of these
laws which seeks to ensure that a licensee fulfills certain pre-conditions before undertaking
the prescribed activities. In order to ensure that the licensing conditions are adhered to
over a period of time, the laws provide for random inspections and, if conditions of license
are violated, penalties have been prescribed. Without going into the specifics of each one
of these laws, the Commission is of the view that the effectiveness of these laws can be
enhanced by bringing in more transparency and expediency in their enforcement. Some
steps that the Commission would like to suggest are as follows:
a. There should be an upper time limit for grant of any license/permission/
registration. The law should provide for penalties if an application is not
disposed of within the stipulated period.
b. Applications would be processed only on a 'First in First out Basis'. All
applications received and pending should be put on the licensing authority:s
website.
c. Picking up units for surprise inspection should not be left to the discretion
of the inspecting officers. Each office should devise an objective procedure to

Citizen Centric Administration - 1he Heart of Governance
r
randomly select units for inspection. Exceptions can be made in case of receipt
of genuine complaints against any unit.
d. The outcome of all inspections must be immediately put in the public
domain.
e. There should be an annual audit of the licensing and inspection system each
year by an independent agency.
f. All licensing authorities should evolve an accessible system for receipt of citizens
complaints.
SPECIAL INSTITUTIONAL MECHANISMS
Introduction
The basic premise behind making administration citizen-centric is to ensure that the
benefits of good governance are available to all sections of society. One of the pillars of a
citizen-centric administrative structure is a robust grievance redressal mechanism. Since
some categories of citizens are more vulnerable than others, there is need for institutions
which redress grievances specific to them. In fact, the Constitution itself provides for various
socio-economic and political safeguards to certain disadvantaged sections of society. These
are guaranteed through enshrining of certain specific rights to such citizens and by laying
down a number of 'Directive Principles of State Policy' for the State to act upon. Further,
in case of two specific groups i.e. the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, the Indian
Constitution also provides for constituting Commissions to safeguard their interests. Apart
from this, the Indian State has also constituted several other Commissions through statutes
to safeguard the rights of different sections of society. Some of these Commissions are as
follows:
i. National Human Rights Commission
ii. National Commission for Women
111. National Commission for Protection of Child Rights
iv. National Backward Classes Commission
v. National Minorities Commission
National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Co-ordination and Avoidance of Overlap in the Functioning oft he Commission.
Suggestions have been made, from time to time, to merge all Commissions into a
comprehensive Human Rights Commission with separate Divisions for Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes, Women and Children. The Commission has considered this suggestion.
While it recognises that there are major issues of overlap and potential conflict which would
need to be addressed, the suggestion for merging of the Commissions, particularly in larger
States, is impracticable and would fail to adequately address the special problems of different
disadvantaged groups. However, this may be possible in case of some of the much smaller
States where the various Commissions to redress the grievances of different sections of
society could be constituted into a single 'multi-role' Commission to carry out the specific
functions of the existing constitutional and statutory Commissions of that State.
At the basic level, in case of complaints, coordination between different Commissions at
the national and state levels could easily be facilitated through creation of electronic data
bases and networking. For having a seamless exchange of data, a common complaint format
needs to be devised for all such Commissions constituted to monitor and investigate the
onstitutional and legal safeguards. This common format would have specifically designed
ata fields to capture the details of the victim(s) and complainants. In case of complaints filed
w'thout utilizing the specifically designed format, the necessary details could be ascertained at
t e time of registration of the case itself The Commission has recommended in its Eleventh
eport entitled 'Promoting e-Governance: The SMART Way Forward' that such databases
cou d be generated in a prospective manner without waiting for feeding and updating of the
historical data. Within each Commission, a concerted effort needs to be made to identify
th dominant grievance in each of the complaints received at the preliminary stage itself
so t at the comp aint could be assigned to the Commission which is best suited to redress
the grievance of the comp ainants. As mentioned earlier, Section 3(3) of the Prevention of
Human . hts Act (PHRA) provides thafthe Chairperson of the NCW, NCSC, CST,
an NC are deemed to be members of the NHRC. This expanded Commission may
lay own the norms to dea with complaints by the most appropriate Commission. Nodal
Officers in each Commission may b a pointed to coordinate such complaints.
The c ea ion of a database and networking would assist these Commissions in not only
strea lining their workload but also in deciding which body would be the best agency to
car u investi ations. Further, it would also help in identifying those areas and groups
where the rights of such groups of citizens are more prone to abuse. This would assist the
respective governments in devising specific measures to address the situation.

Citizen Centric Administration - The Heart of Governance
A More Focussed Approach
A large number of complaints are received by these Commissions which are regularly
disposed by them by providing some relief to the victims. A good citizen centric governance
system should ensure that occasions for such complaints do not arise. Efforts have to be
made by the Union and State Governments to ensure that the cases of violation of the
rights of citizens especially the vulnerable sections are significantly reduced if not eliminated
altogether. Preventive measures would also have to be taken to eliminate cases of serious
human rights violations such as custodial deaths, torture etc.
In addition to the criminal justice system, the National and State Human Rights Commissions
as well as the other Commissions could play an important role in preventing such violations
of citizens' right and also in mitigating the hardships of the victims. An analysis of the cases
disposed of by NHRC over the last three years reveals that a wide variety of complaints of
human rights violations are received and processed. But despite the efforts of the NHRC/
SHRCs, the number of such cases has not been significantly reduced.
Therefore, the Union and the State Governments should take proactive steps to eliminate
causes of such occurrences. This could be achieved by prioritizing the more serious offences
like custodial deaths/rapes etc. Guidance of the NHRC and SHRCs may be taken to prepare
and implement an action plan for this purpose.
Parliamentary Oversight
Since these Commissions are mandated only to make recommendations in their Reports
which are to be laid before Parliament or the State Legislatures or both, their effectiveness
depends on the fate of such recommendations i.e. on their final implementation. The issue
of non-acceptance of several recommendations of these Commissions was further discussed
in this report.
The Commission has examined this issue and is of the view that in order to make these
Commissions more effective, there is need for creating a separate Parliamentary Standing
Committee for deliberating on the Annual Reports of these specific Commissions. This
way parliamentary oversight would help ta enhance accountability an the one hand and
effective implementation of the Commissions' recommendations on the other.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
PROCESS SIMPLIFICATION
Simplifying Internal Procedures
The working of most government organizations is based on the Weberian principle of
decision making governed by rules and regulations to ensure objectivity and uniformity.
As a result, the processes and structures in any government organization generally owe
their existence to and are regulated by statutes, rules and regulations etc. These rules and
regulations or procedural manuals have been formulated over a long period - with many
processes still continuing from the colonial period.
The expanse of governance, the complexities and above all the aspirations of citizens have
changed subtantially in the last few decades. Though there have been sporadic attempts at
modifying the old rules and procedures, there has not been an exhaustive and thorough
examination of these especially keeping citizens at the centre stage.
The Commission would like to suggest that all Ministries/Departments should undertake
the exercise of simplification of its their internal procedures. This should be completed in a
time-bound manner within one year. Similarly, the Ministries/Departments should instruct
all organizations under their supervision to carry out this task. State Governments should
also be advised accordingly. This elaborate exercise would involve the following steps for
any organization:
a. Constitution of an in-house core team of persons well versed with internal
procedures.
b. Engaging external experts - if necessary.
c. Getting feedback from citizens.
d. Analyzing all processes from the point of necessity, simplicity, rationality and
citizen centricity.
e. Redesigning processes and forms.
£ Doing a pilot study and getting it evaluated
g. Once the pilot stabilizes, analyzing the changes required in the rules/
statutes.
h. Implementing the change.
1. Creating an incentive mechanism for sustaining the change.

Citizen Centric Administration - The Heart of Governance
The Commission is of the view it is a myth that 'complex processes reduce discretion'. The
remedy lies in taking quick deterrent action in cases of individual aberrations rather than
abandoning simplification for complexity.
Closely associated with the task of simplifying governmental procedures is the reduction
in the number of layers in the decision-making process. One of. the maladies of most
organizations is the existence of a multiplicity oflayers in the organizational hierarchy. This
delays decision making on the one hand and diff uses accountability on the other. Therefore,
structural change should be an integral part of any process simplification exercise.
Monitoring and Evaluation
While monitoring within organizations does take place, impact evaluations are generally rare.
The essence of citizen centric administration is that all public organizations exist to serve the
people at large. To assess the extent to which an organization is serving the public interest,
it is therefore necessary to evaluate the outcome of the activities of an organization.
Evaluation exercises could be carried out by the organization itself or through external
agencies as it involves interaction with a large body of citizens. Evaluation through external
agencies is more effective as citizens are more likely to give frank views to independent
assessors. The Commission would therefore like to suggest that each government office which
has public dealings should have an external evaluation conducted every year in addition to
those conducted by the organization itself.
The Commission would not like go into technical details of tests, but would suggest the
constitution of an expert group to devise a practical test for the purpose of driving licenses.
Such practical tests have been used to conduct recruitment of drivers in several public
transport organizations.
The Commission is also of the view that in order to reduce the workload of the transport
department, the testing processes could be outsourced.
The Motor Vehicles Department should however monitor these tests randomly to ensure
that these are being properly conducted without undue harassment but at the same time
ensuring that those not fit are denied a driving license.
The emphasis at present is on following the detailed procedure for registering births and
deaths by seeking information in a prescribed proforma, fixing time frames for information
and prescribing a cumbersome procedure and payment of fees for late information rather
than on facilitating achievement of 10 0% registration of births and deaths. The Commission

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
is of the view that a good law on such an important issue should emphasise on the need to
ensure 1000/0 credible registration of births and deaths and procedural formalities should
be the means to achieve this, rather than becoming an end in themselves. Further, the role
of the Registrar in this entire process should be much more proactive and the law should
provide that it should be the duty of the Registrar to register each case of birth and death
within his jurisdiction irrespective of whether a formal application has been received by him
or not. At present, the law is silent on this aspect and the entire onus to inform the Registrar
of the events of births and deaths has been placed on public and private functionaries. In
case the Registrar has a very large jurisdiction and it may thus not be feasible for him to
keep suo motu track of every birth and death, the problem can be overcome by designating
a larger number of public functionaries as Registrars with each of them being assigned a
manageable jurisdiction. Furthermore, each Registrar would have to be empowered under
the law to seek and obtain information from any person. For this purpose the Law should
provide that the Registrar should have the power to issue notice seeking information from
any person, regarding births and deaths and the person shall be bound to provide such
information. The Commission understands that compliance to the provisions of the law
has been weak. Therefore, a provision to impose fines should be incorporated in the law for
non-complains and in order to make the process of imposition of fines quick and deterrent,
the power to levy fines should be given to the District Registrar.
The Commission is of the view that the provision of late fees for delayed registration is
an impediment in achieving 1000/0 registration and needs to be done away with. The
Commission also feels that the procedure and the scrutiny of delayed registration cases
needs to be modified, and a duty needs to be cast on the Competent Authority to enquire
into the veracity of the claimed event. If the Competent Authority comes to the conclusion
that the event did actually take place, he/she shall order for the registration of the same.
There may be a provision for imposition of late fines, but payment of fines should not be
a pre-condition for the registration.
Building Licenses and Completion Certificates
Local self governing bodies both in urban and rural areas regulate building activities in their
jurisdiction in order to ensure planned development in line with the land use regulations
and provisioning of infrastructure. This activity is generally perceived to be cumbersome,
non-transparent and prone to corruption. While there are wide variations between States
and across cities in the procedures prescribed for this purpose, generally it involves the
following steps:

Citizen Centric Administration - 1h~ H~art of Governance
i. Submission of proposed building plan application supported by various
documents.
ii. Payment of the prescribed fees.
iii. Scrutiny of the documents by the officials oft he local body to ensure compliance
with the regulations.
iv. Site inspection by the officials.
v. Submission to the competent authority for approval. vi. Grant of the building
permit.
Several cities have taken steps to simplify this procedure in order to make it less cumbersome.
This is basically sought to be done by shifting the onus for compliance with the building
bye-laws and local plans to the owner and the concerned Architect on the same principles as
has been done for self assessment of property tax. For example, Delhi, Bengaluru, Mysore,
Hyderabad etc. have already adopted simplified procedures for grant of building permits on
the basis of certification by the ownerlregistered architect on a time-bound basis. Generally,
the steps involved are the following:
i. The building permit notice is given by the owner through his/her architect in
the concerned office of the local body along with required documentation -
affidavits/ undertaking/ indemnity bond certifying adherence to the building
regulation - along with required fee.
ii. After scrutiny, sanction is issued within a fixed time limit and generally a stamp
is affixed on the sanction letter to the effect that sanction has been accorded on
the basis of affidavit/undertakings submitted by owner/registered architect.
iii. If the documents are not in order, the application is rejected straight away and
reasons informed.
iv. In case of discrepancies, mis-representation etc., the defaulting architect is to
be black listed and the matter is to be reported to the Council of Architecture
for appropriate action against the concerned architect.
v. In order to ensure that the information submitted is correct, random sample
of sanction cases is verified.

Reports of the Administrive Reform~ Commission - A Summary
Government of India ha/~s~' tried to encourage local bodies to adopt such simplified
procedures through the Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM).
The guidelines of JNNURM provide for a set of mandatory reforms as well as optional
reforms. Revision of bye-laws to streamline the approval process for cohstruction of
buildings, developmen~ .of sites etc. is included in the, set of option~ reforms.
The Commission feels that in view of the immediate benefit to the citizens and because
the administrative simplification required does not entail huge resources and can be done
relatively quickly, these procedural simplifications should be made mandatory for the
State Goverq.ments and local bodies by suitably modifying the guidelines prescribed under
JNNURM. Apart from this, the State Governments should be encouraged to adopt the
same principles for other small and medium sized towns and cities also.
In addition, the Commission is of the view that this simplified procedure should be adopted
for grant of completion certificates by local bodies. This would, however, require considerable
capacity building in the enforcement wings of the local bodies concerned to ensure that
the undertakings given by the owners/architects are complied with. In case of completed
buildings, a hundred per cent verification after the issue of completion certificates on the
basis of self-certification would be necessary within a specified period of90 days. The Rules
should provide heavy penalties, including demolition, for violation of conditions as well
as for negligence or collusion, if any, on the part of the prescribed verifying authority. The
help of local residents' associations may be obtained for this purpose.

ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE OF GOVERNMENT
OF INDIA
GLOBAL LESSONS
The concern for much more effective governance that can give best value for money to
taxpayers, meets the needs of citizens, especially the disadvantaged, and is accountable
to the stakeholders of the governance system has led to the development of a number of
mechanisms and techniques. While there is no uniform formula or template for successful
reform, the following are some of the lessons that could be drawn from the experience in
other countries.
1. Political Commitment:
In most of these countries, the reforms agenda was pushed and sustained by the country's
political leadership at the apex level.
The vision of the political leadership and a consensus across party lines for governance
reforms to promote a more efficient and effective functioning of government agencies is
a prerequisite for triggering such reforms. Stable governments and a demand from the
citizenry for change also tend to be features of effective governance reforms. It is therefore
essential that political commitment and consensus for such reforms be developed for these
initiatives to succeed.
2. Focusing on the core functions of Government: Right sizing, Outsourcing
Modern developmental States tend to be very large, with an excess of clerks and menial staff
but are often short of the right kind of managerial, vocational, and technical talent, such
as teachers and health professionals to serve the indigent, engineers and other professionals
to set up and operate infrastructure projects, and competent professional managers to run
-
state-owned enterprises, agencies, boards, councils, development programmes, poverty
alleviation programmes, and the like. So they need to shed excess manpower in certain
categories or re-deploy it for more useful ends, and also employ more people of the right
sort. Outsourcing of government activities to business/civil society bodies/citizens is a more
reliable tool than privatization for improving the efficiency of governance and/or reducing

Rep.orts .of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
the costs of services provided by the State. This is because it is more selective - only those
activities of a government body are outsourced that can be done more economically and/
or better than within the government body. Outsourcing also provides better control over
outcomes because it is done through contracts that are enforceable at law.
3. Competition in delivery ofp ublic services -Dismantling monopolies
Many public services are delivered by a single agency that is more or less a monopoly, at
least for local users of the services. Monopoly power tends to curb customer orientation and
innovation, and can cause distress to those who avail public services. Competition in the
provision of public services can yield better service at lower cost, and overall may be quite
useful to society. Competition can be created in several ways: license private sector! civil
society bodies to provide public services break up a large public sector service dispensing
unit into a number of smaller public bodies that provide a choice to people get public
service bodies do a 'market test', that is invite bids for providing one or more of the services
they are currently providing, and outsource if the bid exceeds the current cost, quality etc.
parameters of the public service (such as a government employment agency inviting bids
for finding employment for the unemployed in a particular city).
Corporatizing even a not-for-profit government service offers some advantages. First, it
sends a clear message to its management that the service is to operate on economic lines
(even when making money is not the prime consideration). That is, it is expected to be
cost-conscious, efficient, productive, innovative, and 'customer' -friendly. Secondly, since it
is a corporation, it has a different legal structure than a government department. It would
have flexibility in terms of raising financial resources from bodies other than the government
and developing its own personnel and operating policies. If government control is kepi
to the minimum regarding overall policies and objectives, it is a device that can minimize
political and bureaucratic interference and enhance performance.
Privatization comes in many different forms, ranging from outright sale of a government
asset and relinqui.shment of control over its use to the buyer, to sale but retention of at least
some control through, for instance, the golden share device, to the award of a management
contract to a private party without relinquishing government ownership. Privatization is
not a panacea for improved governance performance.
4. Agencification
The basic idea was that Agencies should be carved out of government departments to
carry out specific executive functions within a mandate and a framework of policy and

Organisational Structure of Government of India
resources provided by the relevant ministry. The attempt was to separate policy making
from implementation and to bring in professional management for implementation.
5. Decentralization, Delegation and Devolution
Decentralization is the process of dispersing decision-making governance closer to the people
or citizen. Devolution is the outsourcing of functions, funds, and requisite authority by the
central government to the local governments (states, local self-government bodies etc.).
6 Public Private partnership
Public Private Partnerships amount to joint ventures in developmental or social capital or
even commercial projects. between governments, the private sector and the academia that
are coordinated through power sharing and joint decision making mechanisms like a Board
with represep.tation of all the partners and other key stakeholders. This mechanism has the
merits of pooling human and financial resources, professionalism, and participation of civil
society in governance so that democracy is strengthened.
7. Process Simplification-Deregulation
A regulatory framework is created by government to ensure that policy is effectively
implemented. Often, however, policies and regulations are hastily designed, or their
relevance is overtaken by a change in circumstances. Unless harmful or useless regulations
are periodically removed or modified, administration can get mired in red tape, and large
costs can get borne by business and civil society. Recent events in the financial sector have
shown however that indiscriminate deregulation may be as costly in its own way as over
regulation.
8. Strengthening accountability mechanisms
Ensuring accountability and promoting an ethical approach in governance institutions is
vital to improved governance.
9. E-governance
E-governance is better delivery of government services to citizens, impro¥ed interactions of
government with business, citizen empowerment, and more efficient governance through
information technology.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
10. Performance management system (PMS)
For each public service, the major components of PMS are the service's aims and mission,
strategic objectives set by the organization offering it, breaking down of the objectives for
the components of the organization, the identification of agreed upon targets of individual
manager and his/her key result areas, periodic reporting of performance against targets and
standards, review by superior authority, and remedial action. At every level, the specific
needs of the 'customers' of the service, as well as critical success factors and the closing of
any capability or other gaps have to be kept in mind.
11. Empowering the citizen-customer
A number of mechanisms are available for enabling the voice of the people to be heard.
Citizens' charters, publicizing the standards of services on offer to the people, effective
grievance redress mechanisms, right to information etc are some of these that have been
evolved in different countries.
12. Promotion and diffusion ofg ood governance practices
Many innovations occur in the recesses of the government but remain unknown Thanks to
high IT connectivity, it is possible to bring innovations anywhere in the government, and
indeed in any government, to the notice of all administrators for potential application. All
it takes to diffuse innovations and good practices in governance is a national governance
website for innovations and good practices, some encouragement and reward for logging
these on to the website, with a software for sorting these out by function, and a cell in
each ministry to bring significant relevant innovations and good practices to the notice of
the ministry head.
13. Policy evaluation and Regulatory impact assessment
Often, policies are hastily conceived. Better appraisal of policies, through inter-disciplinary
teams, wide public debate, and the involvement of stakeholders and domain experts can
surely reduce the dysfunctional consequences of public policies and increase the benefits.
Regulatory impact assessment usually consists of a checklist of questions relating to assessing
whether a regulation is worth having or not. The 0 ECD checklist includes the following: Is
the problem for which regulation has been designed correctly defined? Is government action
in designing a regulation justified? Is the regulation the best option? Does the regulation
have a sound legal base? What level of government should be involved in operating the
regulation? Do the benefits of regulation justify its costs? Is the knowledge about how the

Organisational Structure of Government of India
regulation is going to impact/is impacting various parts of society available to the public?
Is the regulation clear, consistent, comprehensible and accessible to the actual regulators?
Have all the stakeholders had an opportunity to be heard? How will compliance to the
regulation be achieved? To this must be added the important question whether there has
been excessive deregulation, if so, in which sector.
14. Benchmarking for continuous improvement:
Benchmarking is a process of identifYing highly effective processes, structures, and systems
in use within a system or outside it with a view to making such changes as are necessary to
close the gap. Since comparisons are painful, and may require painful decisions, it is essential
to get the top management to support benchmarking. Benchmarking is likely to be seen
as especially useful when it helps implement the organization's mission, goals, and strategy
more effectively. Participative benchmarking is more likely to succeed than authoritarian
benchmarking, and cross-functional benchmarking teams are more likely to come up with
useful benchmarks than teams consisting of the same genre of specialists.
15. Governance indices:
Governance indices indicate what is happening to different social groups in terms of their
quality of their life, especially to those that are disadvantaged or vulnerable and could assist
the state and civil society to take appropriate and expeditious remedial action.
The Constitutional Provisions
The Constitution has provided an elaborate framework for the governance system in India.
Part V, Chapter 1 deals with the Union Executive, Chapter II deals with the Parliament
and Chapter IV deals with the Union Judiciary. The Executive Power of the Union vests in
the President and is exercised by him either directly or through officers subordinate to him
in accordance with the Constitution (Article 53). Article 74 provides that there shall be a
Council of Ministers with the Prime Minister at the head to aid and advise the President
who shall, in the exercise of these functions, act in accordance with such advice. Article 75
provides that the Prime Minister shall be appointed by the President and the other Ministers
shall be appointed by the President on the advice of the Prime Minister. Article 77 provides
for the Conduct of Government Business.
Exercising powers vested by virtue of Article 77, the President has made the "The
Government of India (Allocation Of Business) Rules". The Rules stipulate that the business
of the Government of India shall be transacted in the Ministries, Departments, Secretariats
and Offices specified in the First Schedule to these rules (all of which are hereinafter

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
referred to as "departments"). The distribution of subjects among the departments shall
be as specified in the Second Schedule to these rules. The manner in which the officers are
required to help the Minister in the discharge of his/her executive functions is governed by
the Government of India (Transaction of Business) Rules. The Rules provide that all business
allotted to a Department shall be disposed of by, or under general or special directions of,
the Minister-in-charge, subject to certain limitations where consultation is required with
other departments or where cases have to be submitted to the Prime Minister, the Cabinet
and its Committees or the President. These Rules also provide for the constitution of the
Standing Committees of the Cabinet and each Standing Committee shall consist of such
Ministers as the Prime Minister may from time to time specify.
The Rules also provide for appointment of ad hoc Committees of Ministers for investigating
and reporting to the Cabinet, and, if so authorized, for taking decisions on such matters.
The Rules also stipulate that it shall be the responsibility of the Departmental Secretary,
who shall be the administrative head thereof, to ensure observance of these Rules in the
Department .
The Structure ofa Department
The work of Government of India is distributed into different Ministries/Departments.
The Secretary is the administrative head of a Department and in a Department, the structure
may comprise of Special Secretaries, Additional Secretaries, Joint Secretaries, Directors,
Deputy Secretaries, Under Secretaries and Section Officers. The functions of each of these
are spelt out in the Central Secretariat Manual of Office Procedure as follows:
Each Department may have one or more attached or subordinate offices. The role of these
offices are:
"6.2 Attached and Subordinate offices -
(1) Where the execution of the policies of the government requires
decentralisation ofe xecutive action and! or direction, a department may have
under it executive agencies called 'Attached' and 'Subordinate' offices.
(2) Attached offices are generally responsible for providing executive
direction required in the implementation of the policies laid down by
the department to which they are attached. They also serve as repository
of technical information and advise the department on technical aspects
of question dealt with by them.

Organisational Structure of Government of India
(3) Subordinate offices generally function as field establishments or as agencies
responsible for the detailed execution of the policies of government. They
function under the direction of an attached office, or where the volume
of executive direction involved is not considerable, directly under a
department. In the latter case, they assist the departments concerned in
handling technical matters in their respective fields of specialisation."
Besides, the attached and subordinate offices there are a large number of organizations
which carry out different functions assigned to them. These may be categorized as
follows :
"7. Constitutional Bodies: Such bodies which are constituted under the provisions of
the Constitution of India.
8. Statutory Bodies: Such bodies which are established under the statute or an Act
of Parliament.
9. Autonomous Bodies: Such bodies which are established by the Government to
discharge the activities which are related to governmental functions. Although such
bodies are given autonomy to discharge their functions in accordance with the
Memorandum of Associations etc., but the Government's control exists since these
are funded by the Government of India.
10. Public Sector Undertakings: Public Sector Undertaking is that part of the industry
which is controlled fully or partly by the Government. These undertakings have been
setup in the form of companies or corporations in which the shares are held by the
President or his nominees and which are managed by a Board of Directors which
includes officials and non-officials."
Reforms Since Independence
Strengths and Weaknesses oft he Existing Structure
The existing structure of the Government of India has evolved over a long period. It has
certain inherent strengths which have helped it stand the test of time. However there are
weaknesses also which render the system bound by red-tap ism and thus unresponsive.
Strengths
a. Time Tested System - adherence to rules and established norms: The
Government of India has evolved an elaborate structure, rules and procedures

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
for carrying out its functions which have contributing to nation building and
the creation of an inclusive state. These have ensured stability both during
crises as well as normal times. At the same time, where considered essential
innovative structures have been created in form of empowered commissions,
statutory boards, autonomous societies and institutions especially in the fields
related to research, science and technology.
b. Has provided stability during transfer of power through elections: The structure
of Government staffed by the permanent civil servants has provided continuity
and stability during the transfer of power from one elected government to the
other. This has contributed to the maturing of our democracy.
c. Commitment to the Constitution - political neutrality: The well laid down
rules and procedures of government have upheld the neutrality of the civil
services and prevented politicisation of government programmes and services.
This has helped in evolution of institutions based on the principles enshrined
in the Constitution.
d. Link between policy making and its implementation: The framework of the
Government of India has facilitated a staffing pattern which promotes a link
between policy making and implementation. This has also helped the structure
of both the Government of India and the States and promoted the concept of
cooperative federalism.
e. A national outlook amongst public functionaries: Public servants working
in Government of India as well as its attached and subordinate offices have
developed a national outlook transcending parochial boundaries. This has
contributed to strengthening national integration.
Weaknesses
a. Undue emphasis on routine functions: The Ministries of Government of India
are often unable to focus on their policy analysis and policy making functions
due to the large volume of routine work that they are saddled with. This leads
to national priorities not receiving due attention. Often, functions which are
best carried out by the State or Local Governments or could easily be outsourced
continue to be retained with the Union Government.

Organisational Structure of Government of India
b. Proliferation of Ministries/Departments -weak integration and coordination:
The creation of a large number of ministries and departments sometimes due
to the compulsion of coalition politics has led to illogical division of work and
lack of an integrated approach even on closely related subjects. It has been
observed that the Ministries/Departments often carve out exclusive turfs and
tend to work in isolated silos. This, at times, detracts from examination of
issues from a wide national perspective and in an integrated manner.
c. An extended hierarchy with too many levels: Government of India has an
extended vertical structure which leads to examination of issues at many levels
frequently causing delays in decision making on the one hand and lack of
accountability on the other. Another noteworthy feature of the structure is that
several levels are redundant as they do not contribute to the decision making
process.
d. Risk avoidance: A fallout of a multi-layered structure has been a tendency
towards reverse delegation and avoidance of risk in decision making. Another
aspect of the existing structure is an increasing emphasis on consultations
through movement of files as a substitute for taking decisions. This leads to
multiplication of work, delays and inefficiency.
e. Absence of team work: The present rigid hierarchal structure effectively rules
out team work so necessary in the present context where an inter-disciplinary
approach is the need of the day.
f. Fragmentation of functions: At the operational level also, there has been a
general trend to divide and subdivide functions making delivery of services
inefficient and time - consuming. Several decades ago, this was captured in a
telling manner in a Shankar's Cartoon of an official being appointed as "Deputy
Assistant Director General, Envelopes (Glue)!
g. Except in the case of a few committees and boards, there has been considerable
weakening of the autonomy conceived at the time of their formation.
CORE PRINCIPLES OF REFORMING THE STRUCTURE OF GOVERNMENT
The extensive discussions and consultations that the Commission has had, the studies it
has made (as detailed in earlier reports) and the experience of its own working lead to the
conclusion that, over the years, the weaknesses have become stronger and the strengths have

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
become weaker. As a part of comprehensive administrative reforms, there is urgent need to
reform the structure in order to reverse this trend. A major and basic restructuring is essential
to combat the evils of fragmentation, narrow departmentalism, concentration of powers
and micro-management at the higher levels, inordinate delays and lack of accountability.
The Commission feels that the following core principles should govern the restructuring
of the Government of India.
a. The Union Government should primarily focus on the following core areas:
i. Defence, International relations, National Security, justice and rule of
law.
ii. Human development through access to good quality education and
healthcare to every citizen.
iii. Infrastructure and sustainable natural resource development.
iv. Social security and Social justice
v. Macro economic management and retorted economic Planning
VI. National policies in respect of other sectors
b. The principle of subsidiarity should be followed to decentralise functions to
State and Local Governments.
c. Subjects which are closely inter-related should be dealt with together: In any
organization, functional division is inevitable but it should not be at the cost
of an integrated approach towards organizational goals. It is therefore necessary
that while structuring Government into Ministries and Departments, a golden
mean between the need for functional specialization and the adoption of an
integrated approach is adopted. This would involve an in-depth analysis of all
the government functions, followed by their grouping into certain key categories
to be linked to a Ministry.
d. Separation ofP olicy Making Functions from Execution: In any large organization
efficient management necessitates that the higher echelons concentrate more
on strategic decisions and policy making whereas the lower echelons focus
on operational decisions and implementation of policies. In the context of

Organisational Structure of Government of India
Government, this would require the Ministries to give greater emphasis to
the policy making functions while delegating the implementation functions
to the operational units or independent organizations/agencies. This is all the
more necessary because policy making today is a specialized function which
requires a broader perspective, conceptual understanding of the domain and
proper appreciation of the external environment. Implementation of the policies
on the other hand require in-depth knowledge of the subject and managerial
skills.
e. Coordinated implementation: Coordination is essential in implementation
as in policy making. The proliferation of vertical departments makes this an
impossible task except in cases where empowered commissions, statutory bodies
and autonomous societies have been created. There is considerable scope for
more of such inter-disciplinary bodies in important sectors. This should be
pursued urgently. In cases, where these already exist, the tendency to reduce
autonomy should be reversed.
£ Flatter Structures-reducing the number of levels and encouraging team work:
The structure of an organization including those in government should be tailor
made to suit the specific objectives it is supposed to achieve. The conventional
approach in the Government of India has been to adopt uniform vertical
hierarchies (as prescribed in the Manual for Office Procedure). There is a need
to shift to flatter organizations with greater emphasis on team work.
g. Well defined accountability: The present multi-layered organizational
structure with fragmented decision-making leads to a culture of alibis for non
performance. The tendency to have large number of on-file consultations,
often unnecessary, leads to diffused accountability. A clearer demarcation
of organizational responsibilities would also have helped in developing a
performance management system for individual functionaries.
h. Appropriate Delegation: A typical characteristic of a government organization
is the tendency to centralize power and avoid delegation of authority to
subordinate functionaries or units. However, this leads to delays, inefficiency
and demoralization of the subordinate staff. The principle of subsidiarity should
be followed to locate authority closer to the citizens.
Criticality of Operational Units: Government organizations have tended
1.
to become top-heavy with fragmentation, lack of authority, manpower and
" I

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
resources at the operational levels that have a direct bearing on citizens' lives.
Rationalization of Government staff pattern is necessary, commensurate with
the requirements of the citizens.
The issue regarding the types of functions that the government should perform has been
examined by several Commissions/Committees in the past. The First Administrative
Reforms Commission while examining the role of the Union Government in respect of
matters falling within the State Governments' spheres stated that:
'~. we are of the view that the role of the centre in areas which are covered by the State
List ofsubject in the Constitution should be largely that ofa pioneer, guide, disseminator
of information, overall planning and evaluator. The Centre, of course cannot give up
its general responsibility of overseeing that the broad national objectives embodied in
the Constitution are achieved by the States. But that does not mean that the Central
Government should take upon itself tasks and responsibilities which properly belong to
the States or duplicated their functions. Except in the most essential areas and that too for
a limited duration, the Centre should not take upon itselff unctions and responsibilities
which are legitimately those oft he States. "
The First ARC recommended:
'~The role ofC entral Ministries and Departments in subjects falling within the State List
should be confined to matters listed in para 85. An analysis should be made in the light
oft hese criteria oft he items ofw ork now handled by the Central agencies; and such items
as do not fulfill the criteria should be transferred to the States. "
The Fifth Central Pay Commission identified the following areas as the legitimate province
of the Union Government:
• National security
• International relations
• L~w and order
• Management of-economy at macro level
• Setting up of infrastructure
• Social services
• Programmes for disadvantaged sections

Organisational Structure of Government of India
The Fifth Central Pay Commission further examined the structure of Government Qflndia
and recommended a new charter for the Union Government: . . '"
• The Central Government would confine its activities only to the core functions
mentioned in the Union List. Even here, an attempt could be made to prune the
list.
• Some items could be shifted from the Concurrent List to the State list. Education
is one such major subject.
• Matters which are itemized in the State List could be generally left to the States,
with the Centre only dealing with certain minimal aspects ofinternational relations,
overall legislation and coordination.
• The list of Centrally Sponsored Schemes could be brought down sharply to almost
ten National Programmes, with the rest being transferred to the States.
The Fifth Central pay Commission was the view:
''At the same time, it is recognised that there are functions currently performed by
Government which ought to be given up. Direct participation in manufacturing,
mining and economic services and direct control of economic activity in the private
sector are two such major areas. Many countries have divested themselves of public
sector enterprises which could be better run in the private sector in the areas of coal,
steel, fertilizers, air, rail and road transport, tourism, hoteliering, banking, insurance,
and so on. Some countries have turned to the private sector even in the traditionally
super-sensitive areas of atomic energy, space and defence production. Where some
activities have been retained in Government, they have been hived off into separate
autonomous agencies with independence of functioning.
All this has wide-ranging implications for the way the Union government needs to be
structured. The decisions that may require to be taken will be of the following broad
types:
(i) Some Ministries and Departments may have to be abolished altogether or
amalgamated with other Ministries and Departments.
(ii) The size of a Ministry or Department may have to be reduced drastically in
order to fit it for the revised role that it has to perform.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Com~ission - A Summary
The Commission is by and large in agreement with the suggestions made by the Fifth
Central Pay Commission and the Expenditure Reforms Commission. In addition the
Commission would like to reiterate that the Union Government should primarily focus
on the core functions mentioned below:
i. Defence, International relations, Public order, justice and rule of law.
ii. Human development through access to good quality education and healthcare
to every citizen.
iii. Infrastructure and sustained natural resource development.
iv. Social security and Social justice
Also the principle of subsidiarity should be the guiding principle while deciding the level
at which a particular function should be carried out.
The Commission is of the view that an optimum size of government workforce is essential
for its effective functioning. While an oversized government may prove to be a burden on
the exchequer apart from breeding inefficiency, an understaffed government may fail to
deliver. Across the board cuts and recruitment freezes have played a role in trimming the
bloated workforce in government, especially when there is resistance to implement any
rationalization of the staff strength. Such procrustean measures however have unintended
consequences leading to shortages in departments that require officials for service delivery.
The Commission has come across examples of skewed staffing patterns with inadequate field
staff in many service delivery agencies, whereas positions at supervisory and headquarters
levels were often overstaffed. It has also led to the undesirable system of short-term contract
appointments of untrained persons. The Commission would like to emphasise that
rationalizing the staff strength in government should be the underpinned by the principle of
criticality of the functions to be performed with respect to the objective of the organization
rather than be driven by numbers.
Reorganising the Ministries and Departments
As in any other large organization, the structure of Government at the apex level reflects the
complex tasks the process of governance involves. Given the varied nature of Government's
responsibility it is inevitable that the structure of Government reflects a functional
classification based on the nature of tasks performed by it. Governments in all countries
are therefore organized into different Ministries and Departments that are entrusted with
separate domains of responsibility such as defence, finance, health, education etc.

Organisational Structure of Government of India
Article 74 of the Indian Constitution provides that there shall be a Council of Ministers with
the Prime Minister at the head to aid and advise the President who shall, in the exercise of
his functions, act in accordance with such advice. Article 75 further provides that the Prime
Minister shall be appointed by the President. and the other Ministers shall be appointed by
the President on the advice of the Prime Minister. It also provides that the total number of
Ministers, including the Prime Minister, in the Council of Ministers shall not exceed 15%
of the total number of Members of the Lok Sabha.
In India, Rules of Business have been laid down providing f5lf>t e subjects allotted to different
Ministries and how the business allotted to the Ministries-~.h9uld be transacted~ Thus the
Government of India (Transaction of Business Rules) states that subject to the provisions
of these Rules in regard to consultation with other departments and submission of cases to
the Prime Minister, the Cabinet and its Committees and the President, all business allotted
to a department under the Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961, shall
be disposed of by, or under the general or special directions of the Minister-in-charge of
that Department.
The distribution of subjects among the departments shall be as specified in the First Schedule
to the Allocation of Business Rules and shall include all attached and subordinate offices
or other organizations including Public Sector Undertakings concerned with its subjects.
At present the number of Ministries listed in the First Schedule is 50.
In 1947, the Council of Ministers comprised of 16 members including the Prime Minister
and Deputy Prime Minister. The size of the Council of Ministers has over the years increased
significantly with the expansion of the role and apparatus of the State and also due to the
political compulsions particularly in an era of coalition governments, to accommodate
more Members of Parliament as Ministers. In order to restrict the size of the Council of
Ministers to a reasonable limit, the Constitution (Ninety-first Amendment) Act, 2003,
provided that the strength of the Council shall not exceed 15% of the number of Members
of Parliament in the Lok Sabha.
As can be seen there has been significant proliferation of the Ministries and Departments
in the Government of India in the years since Independence. Creating new departments to
deal with individual subjects has the advantage of focusing greater attention and resources
on that field but it also carries with it the disadvantages oflack of coordination and inability
to take an integrated approach to national priorities and problems. For example, 'Transport'
is an extremely important subject which requires an integrated approach. Different aspects
of this subject are dealt with different Ministries. The Ministry of Civil Aviation deals,
inter-alia with aircraft and air navigation and other aids relating to air navigation and

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
carriage of passengers and goods by air; while the Ministry of Railways is responsible for
all aspects of rail transport; Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways deals
with maritime shipping and navigation, highways and motor vehicles and the Ministry
of Urban Development deals with planning and coordination of urban transport systems.
Thus 'Transport' as a subject has been fragmented into multiple disciplines and assigned to
independent ministries making the necessary integrated national approach to this important
sector extremely difficult.
In India, the Departmentally Related Standing Committees of Parliament is a good example
of integration of inter-connected subject matters
Suggested Ministries/Departments
Schedule I of the Business Rules lists out 80+ Ministries and Departments. The Commission
is of the view that in order to evolve an integrated approach to national issues, it would be
desirable to categorise the functions of Government into a reasonable number of groups.
The existing departments would therefore have to be distributed among the 20-25 groups
of closely related subjects and functions.
The Commission is aware of the recent constitutional amendments which limit the size of
the Union Council of Ministers to 150/0 of the strength of the Lok Sabha. The Commission
recognises that the size of the Council of Ministers reflects the needs of representational
democracy for a large and diverse country like India. It would also be unrealistic to expect
for curtailment in the size of the Council of Ministers in an era of coalition politics. Instead,
a more pragmatic approach would be to retain the existing size of the Council of Ministers
but increase the level of coordination among the departments by providing for a Senior
Cabinet Minister to head each of the 20-25 closely related Departments. He/She may be
designated as the "First or coordinating Minister" (or any suitable nomenclature) and he
would coordinate and provide the overall lead for the entire group of departments. Within
the broad groups (20-25) mentioned earlier, there could be several departments. Individual
departments or any combination of these could be headed by the First Minister, another
Cabinet Minister or Minister of State. The Commission recognizes that for this arrangement
to work, adequate delegation and division of work among the concerned Ministries would
have to be worked out.
This would in effect mean that the concept of a Ministry would need to be redefined. In
the new dispensation, a Ministry would mean a group of departments whose functions and
subjects are closely related and is assigned to a First Minister for the purpose of providing

Organisational Structure of G-overnment of India
-
.
overall leadership and coordination. The Departments would correspond to the existing list
of departments mentioned in the First Schedule of the Allocation of Business Rules. This
concept of Ministry and the First Minister may be explicitly laid down in the Allocation
of Business Rules. As a consequence of this, a rationalization of posts at the Secretary level
may also be considered.
This arrangement would in effect lead to enhanced coordination on national issues and at
the same time meet the requirements of providing adequate Ministerial representation in a
large and diverse country, without causing a proliferation in the number of Ministries. Even
after this restructuring there would still be some issues which would cut across different
Ministries. In such cases suitable inter-ministerial coordination mechanisms would be
necessary.
Without going into the details of how the existing Ministries can be grouped together based
on how closely their subjects are inter-related. The Commission would like to demonstrate
through the following examples how this can be achieved.
For example, the Ministry of Local Government would include the following Ministries/
Departments:
i. Rural Development
ii. Drinking Water Supply
iii. Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation
iv. Urban Development
v. Panchayati Raj
Further, the following Ministries/.Departments should be clubbed under a Ministry of
Transport:
i. Shipping
ii. Road Transport and ~ighways
iii. Civil Aviation
iv. Railways

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Similarly, the Ministry of Energy would include the foU . In .f Ministries/Departments:
. '}[h :., /
i. New and Renewable Energy
ii. Petroleum and Natural Gasl
iii. Power
As a consequence of this exerd~b? ~er Co'mmiss'o?l x11ects that the number of Ministries
in Government of India could g~ Fqu~ep'fron{k gilt' sto at present to about 20-25.
I'll nOll£.Jjl() '(j .£ g ,
Recasting thetAllocation ofB usiness ~ie'si 5J .l. 0 ; j .. I
, r • i
" .. '/1()(O I~I .,)-?,f 'JU
The Allocation of Business Rules form the basis of the structure of Government of India bY1
specifying the Departments among whom the functional division of work of Government
of India has been done. The Commission has therefore examined these Rtde. itifdetail. The
Commission has also examined similar work allocation rules in other cOlllIth~.
, -,II01'
.The Allocation of Business Rules comprise an exhaustive listing of the subjects and activities
of the various Departments of Government of India. It also enlists thd,attached and
subordinate offices and other organizations including Public Sector Undertakings. This
detailed listing has the advantage of clearly demarcating the turf of individual departments
so that there is no ambiguity with regard to their responsibilities. The allocation of Business
has been kept up to date by a series of amendments and has stood the test of time.
However the Commission feels that there is need to recast these Rules in order to make
them more focussed on the goals and outcomes of each Department. Besides, there is a need
to shift the emphasis from a listing of activities/subjects of each Department to a broader
perspective. There are some other shortcomings that need to be resolved in order to make
these rules more precise and meaningful. These are briefly analyzed below:-
While the items are listed in detail they relate only to subject concerned and do not deal
with the responsibility relating to that subject.
A perusal of the Allocation of Business Rules indicates that in many cases they tend to
focus more on the subjects, activities and organizations under each department and less on
the overall responsibilities and functions of the department(s) or the Ministry/Ministries
in charge.
The Commission is of the view that for all departments of Government of India, these
rules should first provide a Statement of the mission of the department rather than provide
a mere list of subjects, functions, Acts and organisations.

Organisational Structure of Government of India
The allocation is not uniformly detailed nor does the listing of functions of various
departments follow a uniform pattern.
It is observed that for certain departments, subjects, functions and organizations are
listed out in exhaustive detail whereas in certain other departments the listing is far less
comprehensive.
There is need to bring about greater uniformity in the description of the roles and functions
of the various Ministries/Departments.
Listing ofl aws
While listing of subjects covered by statutes some are covered, many are left out.
With the large number oflaws that have been enacted in India, listing out all such laws and
putting them department-wise in the Allocation of Business Rules makes then unwieldy.
A better option may be for the Ministries/Departments concerned to maintain a master
list of all laws pertaining to the subjects dealt with in that Ministry/Department instead of
mentioning them in the Allocation of Business Rules. The underlying principle should be
stated in the Rules that all laws relating to the subjects and functions allocated to a Ministry/
Department would fall under its purview.
Listing ofP ublic Sector Units and autonomous organizations
It is observed that all the Public Sector Undertakings have been listed under the concerned
Department.
Instead of mentioning the individual PSUs and autonomous organizations under each
Ministry, the Rules should merely have a generic entry to the effect that all PSUs and
Autonomous Organizations whose functioning is directly related to subject(s) of the
concerned Ministry would be under its jurisdiction. However, in cases where the functional
area of a PSU pertains to more than one Ministry/Department, then it may be advisable
to list out such PSUs under the relevant Ministry/Department.
Ministries and Departments to Primarily Focus on Policy Analysis
Policy Analysis in Government
There are two broad tasks of the government. The first is to formulate policy in pursuance
of objectives that the political leadership specifies, and the second, implementation of that
policy. In a democracy, it is the political leadership-assisted by the civil servants - who set

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
the vision, goals and strategic directions. But sound institutional arrangements play an
important role in whether these visions, goals and strategic directions are translated into
effective policy priorities.
Although precise institutional arrangements have varied, effective governments throughout
the world are characterized by strong systems for strategic policy formulation. At the heart of
these systems are mechanisms for properly preparing policy proposals after due consideration
of future implications, estimating the costs of competing policy options within a disciplined
framework of aggregate expenditures, ensuring extensive horizontal coordination where
policies are spread across a number of departments and where delivery mechanisms are
similarly divided between different parts of the government, and introduction of policy
evaluation systems.
The imperative of providing high quality policy advice requires that the attention of apex
levels in government should not get diverted by the demands of managing administrative
and operational responsibilities. This would call for a broad separation of policy formulation
and implementation responsibilities. What it would mean is that the Ministries responsible
for policy advice including the monitoring and evaluation of policy implementation,
should be separated from departments and entities responsible for delivery of services,
operational matters and enforcement of regulations. Separation of policy-making from
implementation would also work as a mechanism to ensure that contestable policy options
are generated and that the government does not get captured by provider interests which
unduly influence its policy proposals. Such a broad separation of policy and operations
would mean a reduction in the· excessive degree of central control now being exercised by
the ministries over operational matters.
The existing structure in Government of India severely constrains the policy making role
at the apex level. This is because Ministers as well as Secretaries to government, both at
the Government of India and State levels, have multiple and demanding responsibilities
pertaining to a wide range of policy, administrative and implementation activities. The time
they can devote to each of these functions is seriously limited and they often do not find
sufficient time to reflect on important policy and strategic issues. As a result, the policy
making capacity in India is weak.
The Commission has considered how a degree of separation between the policy making
and implementation functions of the ministries and other government agencies can be
best achieved. Under the existing scheme, it is the minister who lays down the extent of
delegation ofv arious functions to different levels within the ministry as well as to its attached
and subordinate offices. In order to enable the ministries, to effectively fulfill their policy

Organisational Structure of Government of India
making role and also to ensure uniformity across ministries, the Commission is of the view
that some general principles to govern the extent of delegation may be incorporated in the
Transaction of Business Rules. These principles may stipulate that the Ministries should
concentrate on the following:
• Policy making and strategic decisions.
• Budgeting
• Monitoring of implementation
• Appointments of key personnel
• Coordination
• Evaluation
Attached and subordinate offices would serve as the executive agencies of the Ministries and
concentrate on the implementation of Government policies and programmes
Policy Evaluation
Systematic policy evaluation, either at the time of the formulation of the policy or at periodic
intervals to assess the current relevance of an established policy, is rare in India. Policies are
often hastily conceived and hurried through the legislature. Some of these ill-conceived
policies became albatrosses and create problems for years. Better appraisal of policies
through inter-disciplinary teams, wide public debate, and involvement of stakeholders and
domain experts can reduce the dysfunctional consequences of public policies and increase
the benefits. The idea should be to evaluate a policy carefully when it is first proposed, and
evaluate periodically the relevance and costs and benefits. The policy evaluation system to
be introduced, should lay down the criteria for evaluation including
• need for the new policy or the continuing necessity of the old policy
• efficiency with which it can be implemented/has been implemented (the ratio of
its benefits to costs)
• the policy effectiveness in terms of larger social purpose such as social equity or
positive externalities
• Priority in terms of government's developmental and good governance strategy.
r

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Such policy evaluation should also highlight alternatives to the current ways ofimplementing
the policy such as participation of the stakeholders in the governance structure for
implementing the policy, and ways of assessing implementation on a fairly regular basis
through surveys, the use of consultants for impact focused groups for impact assessment.
Creation ofE ffective Executive Agencies
Separation of policy and implementation would also call for changes in how the policy
implementing agencies are structured. It is necessary that implementation bodies need to
be restructured by giving them greater operational autonomy and flexibility while, at the
same time, making them responsible and accountable for what they do. It is advisable that,
for the purpose, autonomous organizations like executive agencies be set up to carry out
operational responsibilities. The executive agency is not a policy-making body; but it is by
now a time-tested, highly effective executing body in the public sector, analogous to the
self-contained, quasi-autonomous division of a corporate body. 'Agencification', that is,
extensive use of executive agencies in administration has been found useful in conducting
an extremely wide range of functions. The process known as 'agencification' has been the
cornerstone of public service reforms around the world.
Position in India
In India, the line departments of the government are not in a position to optimally deliver
public services largely because of the overwhelming nature of centralised controls they are
subjected to and lack of operational autonomy and flexibilities. Centralised controls as they
exist now reinforce a focus on inputs rather than results and are the greatest stumbling
block to performance. At present, micro-management is the culture in the ministries. It is,
therefore, necessary that detailed central controls are replaced by guidelines and minimum
standards.
Each Union Ministry should scrutinize the activities and special purpose bodies of the
Ministry. The following questions should be asked as a prelude to the formation of the
ministry's executive agencies:
Does the activity/special purpose vehicle need to be carried on at all? Ministries often
accumulate activities and bodies that have no use in the present context. Such bodies and
activities need to be identified for closure, and their staffs should be re-deployed.
If the activity/body is seen to be necessary in today's context, should the activity be
administered by the Ministry, in the light of the management capacities available in the
civil society and corporate public and private sectors and in the light of current governance

Organisational Structure of Government of India
priorities? If serious equity or security issues or legal issues are not involved, many government
activities can be safely outsourced to institutions in the civil society/corporate public or
private sector, if this is more cost effective than the Ministry carrying on the activity.
Each executive agency, whether a new body or an existing departmental undertaking/
agency/board/special purpose body etc. that is converted into an executive agency, must be
semi-autonomous and professionally managed under a mandate. Such executive agencies
could be structured as a subordinate office of the department or as a board, commission,
company, society etc.
Mere creation of executive agencies is not an end in itself. What is equally important is to
ensure that the right balance between autonomy and accountability is struck while designing
the institutional framework of the agency, which in turn would be determined by the
nature of activity/functions entrusted to it. This could be achieved through well designed
performance agreements, Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) , contracts etc. however,
preparing and enforcing such performance contracts requires considerable up gradation of
capacity in the concerned government departments.
Internal Reorganisation ofM inistries
The new approach to policy making would also call for restructuring the design of the
Ministries to make them less hierarchical, by creating flatter structures with team-based
orientation. The ministries, as they function now, are centralized, hierarchical organizations
tightly divided into many layers, boxes and silos. Much of the civil service hierarchies in the
Ministries continue to be structured along traditional lines of authority, carefully regulated to
ensure that as few mistakes are made as possible. The staff in the ministries is more concerned
with internal processes than with results. The systemic rigidities, needless complexities and
over-centralization in the policy-making structures are too complex and too constraining.
There are too many decision points in the policy structures, and there are a large number
of veto points to be negotiated for a decision to emerge. While such hierarchical exercise of
authority provides some control of quality and integrity of decision-making, it often leads
to exasperating delays and takes the focus away from delivering results. It is necessary that
these hierarchies should be dismantled and team-based structures be introduced.
The best way to achieve the objective of reducing delays and creating more responsive,
efficient and accountable organizational structures would be by modifying the existing
structure of the Government Departments and incorporating elements of team based
working for achieving the tasks and objectives assigned to them. As mentioned earlier, the
Ministries would basically concentrate on policy making, supervision, monitoring and

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
evaluation and budgetary processes while leaving the implementation to executive agencies
(attached / subordinate offices). Functions like supervision and monitoring and evaluation
would continue to be performed through the traditional organizational structure.
Absence of team based working
Recasting the Manual of Office Procedures
As per the Transaction of Business Rules the work in any Department has to be carried out
under the specific or general instructions of the Minister. Since it is not humanly possible
for the Minister to take all decisions, the implication is that there should be a detailed
scheme of delegation of decision making powers at all levels in the Ministry/Department.
A scheme of delegation does exist in each MinistryiDepartment but it has been observed
that in many Departments it is left to the discretion of the officers concerned to judge
for themselves, the level at which a particular matter is to be decided. The experience has
been that officers often tend to 'play safe' and 'mark' files to higher levels even in respect
of routine matters.
The Commission feels that these issues can best be resolved by ensuring that each Department
lays down a detailed scheme of delegation at all levels so that the decision making takes
place at the most appropriate level. The Commission is of the view that it should be laid
in the Manual of Office Procedure that every Ministry should prescribe a detailed scheme
of delegation for its officers. This delegation should be arrived at on the basis of an analysis
of the activities and functions of the Ministry/Department and the type of decisions that
these entail which should be dovetailed with the decision making units identified it that
Department. This should be updated periodically and should also be 'audited' at regular
intervals to ensure adherence to the scheme of delegation. The audit should ensure that the
delegated authority is actually authorized by the delegate. The scheme of delegation should
be placed in the public domain. The basic principle underlying the scheme of delegation
should be that no item of work should be handled at level higher than where it ought to
have been dealt with.
Minimising levels to reduce delays
The number of levels through which a file passes for a decision should not exceed three.
Only in cases where the Minister's approval is required, should the file be initiated by the
Deputy Secretary/Director concerned and moved through the Joint Secretary (or Additional
Secretary/Special Secretary) and the Secretary (or Special Secretary) to the Minister. Cases
requiring approval of the Secretary should go through just two levels (either US and Director,

Organisational Structure of Government of India
US and JS or Director and JS). Cases requiring approval of JS/DirectoriDS should come
through just one level. The exact combination oflevels should be spelt out in the scheme of
delegation for each Ministry/Department whereas the number of levels as suggested above
should be prescribed in the Manual of Office Procedure.
Innovative approaches through multi-disciplinary work teams
At present the increasing need for inter-disciplinary work teams to deal with the complex
issues being handled by each Department is not being met due to the hierarchical and
segmented structure prescribed in the Manual of Office Procedure. There should be greater
flexibility for the concerned Department to adopt the structure best suited for the task. The
Commission would like to emphasise that the conventional hierarchical structure may be
well suited for certain routine administrative functions, but for other activities which require
a more holistic approach flatter structures are more advantageous. For addressing complex
cross cutting issues that cannot be handled in the traditional fashion, the Secretary of the
concerned Department should have the flexibility to create such team based structures.
Shift from an ad-hoc application ofp recedents to systematic classification and transparent use
ofp ast records.
Departments should build an electronic database of decisions that are likely to be used as
precedents. Thereafter such database should be periodically reviewed and where necessary,
changes in rules introduced in order to codify them. There may also be precedents that may
be the result of wrong or arbitrary decision making which the Department would prefer
not to rely on for the future. In such cases the Department would have to appropriately
change its policy/guidelines and if required even the rules to ensure that these precedents
are not wrongly used.
Coordination Mechanisms
Cabinet Committee and GoMs:-
There is need for ensuring extensive horizontal coordination where policies are spread over
a number of departments and where policy delivery mechanisms are distributed in different
parts of the government.
At present the following Cabinet Committees have been constituted:
a. Appointments Committee of the Cabinet
b. Cabinet Committee on Accommodation

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
c. Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs
d. Cabinet Committee on Management of Natural Calamities
e. Cabinet Committee on Parliamentary Affairs
f. Cabinet Committee on Political Affairs
g. Cabinet Committee on Prices
h. Cabinet Committee on Security
i. Cabinet Committee on World Trade Organisation Matters
In addition, several Group of Ministers (GOMs) have been constituted to look into different
issues/subjects. Some of these GOMs have been empowered to take decisions on behalf of
the Cabinet whereas the others make recommendations to the Cabinet. The Commission
understands that constitution of a large number of GoMs has meant that many GoMs are
not able to meet regularly enough to complete their work thus leading to significant delays
on many major issues.
More selective use of the institution of group of ministers would perhaps lead to more
effective coordination particularly if they are empowered to arrive at decision on behalf of the
Cabinet with time limits that are prescribed for completing the work entrusted to them
Coordination Role oft he Cabinet Secretariat
The Cabinet Secretariat plays an important role in coordination of inter-Ministry matters.
Whenever inter-Ministry cooperation is required the concerned Ministries seek the assistance
of the Cabinet Secretariat. These problems are dealt with in the meetings of the Committees
of Secretaries (COS). These Committees are constituted for discussing specific matters and
proposals emanating from various Secretaries to the Government and meetings are held
under the chairmanship of the Cabinet Secretary.
The Cabinet Secretariat is seen as a useful mechanism by the departments for promoting
inter-Ministerial coordination since the Cabinet Secretary is also the head of the civil
services.
Other Coordination Mechanisms
The Commission recognizes the importance of coordination among various ministries/
departments more so because of new and emerging challenges in many sectors which
require a coordinated national response. The Commission has already recommended

Organisational Structure of Government ofIndia
re-grouping of government functions into inter-related categories to be assigned to a First
Minister to improve such coordination. Besides, while examining the internal structures
of the ministries, the Commission has suggested a flexible, in·ter-disciplinary team based
approach which would inherently serve to improve coordination.
The existing mechanisms comprising of Cabinet Committees, Group of Ministers,
Committee of Secretaries and the Cabinet Secretariat should, therefore, continue to meet
this requirement of inter-Ministry coordination.
An area where the Commission feels the need for having a formal coordination mechanism
relates to issues which may arise between the States and the Union Government particularly
in relation to sectors like power, transport, water etc. While at present such issues are
often taken up for resolution by the Government of India through discussions between
the concerned Ministry/Ministries and the States, there may be instances where resolution
of such issues gets delayed in the absence of an inter-ministerial mechanism. It should be
possible to resolve such stalemates by the States bringing the matter before the Cabinet
Secretary for consideration by the Committee of Secretaries based on which the Union
Cabinet could take a final view.
Reducing Paperwork in Government Offices
Creating an Effective Regulatory Framework
Issues
Autonomy ofR egulators
While there is a growing belief that regulation through independent Regulators is more
effective and efficient than through Government departments, it needs to be recognized
that independence and autonomy has to be achieved both from the Government as well
as from the regulated industry.
The fact that the Independent Regulators are established through a statute which clearly
spells out their roles, responsibilities, composition etc. brings in an element of autonomy and
functional independence from the Government. However, the degree of such independence is
influenced by the specific provisions in the law pertaining to the following key aspects:-
• Appointment and Removal of the Members of the Authority
• Financial Autonomy

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
• Power of Government to Give Directions
• Autonomy in personnel matters
The Commission feels that there is need for greater uniformity in the terms of appointment,
tenure and removal of various Regulatory authorities considering these have been set up
with similar objectives and functions they should also enjoy the same degree of autonomy.
The Commission further feels that the initial process of appointment of the Chairman
and Board Members should be transparent, credible and fair. The Commission would,
therefore, suggest that the appointment of the Chairman and Board Members for all such
regulatory authorities should be done by the Union/State Governments from a panel of
names based on recommendations of a Selection Committee. The composition of the
Selection Committee should be defined in the respective Acts and may broadly follow the
pattern laid down in the Electricity Regulatory Commissions Act, 1998.
Similarly, the tenure of the Chairman and Board Members could also be made uniform,
preferably three years or 65 years of age whichever is earlier.
As regards removal of the Chairman and Board Members, legal provisions may be made
uniform while at the same time ensuring sufficient safeguards against arbitrary removal. This
could be achieved by allowing removal by the Union Government only on fulfillment of
certain conditions as laid down in Section 6 of the IRDAAct with the additional safeguard
that a removal for abuse of power shall be preceded by an Enquiry and consultation with
UPSC.
Interface with Government
Since Regulators have been hived off from Government departments for the purpose of
carrying out government policies, a close link between the two is essential while respecting
the autonomy and independence of the regulators. Some aspects of this interface are spelt
out in the statute creating the regulator while others have evolved out of conventions and
practices of government departments.
Accountability
A regulator can retain its legitimacy and credibility only if it is accountable for how it uses
the powers that have been delegated to it by the legislature. Often, it has been perceived that
there is trade off between independence and accountability whereas the two are mutually
reinforcing. Unless there is accountability, independence will not be justified and the greater
the level of autonomy, the more critical it is to have credible accountability mechanisms.

Organisational Structure of Government of India
In practice, Parliamentary oversight of the Regulators in India has been through occasional
appearance before the Parliamentary Committees and the Departmental Consultative
Committees combined with laying of annual reports and other papers before Parliament.
The Commission understands that Government is considering a proposal to bring regulators
of various sectors under Parliamentary scrutiny through an exclusive Parliamentary Standing
Committee for Regulators. The Commission feels that ensuring accountability of Regulators
to Parliament is desirable. However, having an exclusive Parliamentary Committee for
Regulators may not be feasible given the widely varying mandate and area of operations of
the regulators. Since the regulators have to work in close conjunction with the concerned
Ministries, appearance before the Departmentally Related Standing Committees of the
Parliament will facilitate effective legislative oversight. However, it needs to be ensured
that Parliamentary Committees do not question the regulators' day to day functioning,
and instead focus on their major decisions.
The Commission is also of the view that there should be independent evaluation of the work
of these regulators, based on pre-specified parameters. Such evaluation should be done by
a panel of outside experts in a periodic manner.
Uniformity in Structure and Powers
There are significant variations in the size and composition of the governing boards,
manner of appointment, removal of chairman/members, tenure, provision of appeals,
sources of finance, interface with the government etc. The Commission is of the view
that at least in respect of certain provisions like manner of appointment, tenure, interface
with the government etc. the statutory provisions should be by and large uniform for all
regulators.
A suggestion has been made that given the growing importance of regulation in several
critical sectors of economy, governance relating to regulatory institutions has assumed
an important role and in order to focus on regulatory reform and governance, a separate
Department of Regulatory Affairs may be created. Regulation in different sectors may require
sector specific approach and above all a deep insight as well as close cooperation between
the regulator and the concerned government ministries. Creation of a separate department
of Regulatory Affairs would not help in ensuring good quality regulation because a generic
regulatory department - as proposed - would never be able to acquire in-depth sectoral
expertise. The existing coordination mechanisms such as the Committee of Secretaries
could easily ensure that the institutional framework for all regulators follow by an large a
uniform pattern. This task could specifically be assigned to Secretary (Coordination) in
the Cabinet Secretariat.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Multiplicity ofR egulatory Authorities
There is an increasing perception that a number of Regulators are being set up on an ad
hoc basis by different Ministries, sometimes with overlapping jurisdictions leading to lack
of coordination and issues of turf The fact that different regulators have been set up with
varying terms of appointment, tenure etc. is also a reflection of this. Such proliferation of
regulators is not unique to India. In the United Kingdom this issue was examined by the
'Better Regulation Task Force' which in its report of October, 2003 recommended:
(i) Before establishing a new independent Regulator a Department should carry
out a landscape review of the delivery of the policy objective. This should
explore whether another Regulator could take on the new function, or whether
a number of Regulators could be subsumed within the new function.
(ii) Department should carry out regular end-to-end reviews of their policy delivery
areas to assess which bodies continue to deliver their policy objectives effectively
and whether there are some bodies which are no longer necessary.
The Commission is of the view that a similar exercise should be made mandatory for all
Ministries/Departments before they create any new Regulator.
Regulatory Impact Assessment
A cost benefit analysis of any proposal for regulation, whether done directly by a government
department or by an independent regulator, is now the norm in most of the developed
countries. Generally, if the costs of a proposal are likely to outweigh the potential benefits,
then alternative approaches need to be considered. A similar approach is necessary for
evaluating the effectiveness of the existing regulators and regulatory regime. The Commission
is of the view that each statute creating a Regulator should include a provision for an impact
assessment periodically by an external agency. Once the objective of creating a level playing
field is achieved, the intervention of the regulators could be reduced in a phased manner
ultimately leading either to their abolition or to convergence with other Regulators.

STRENGTHENING FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
SYSTEMS
PUBLIC FINANCE MANAGEMENT-CONCEPTS AND CORE PRINCIPLES
Definition ofP ublic Finance Management
Public finance management basically deals with all aspects of resource mobilization and
expenditure management in government. Just as managing finances is a critical function
of management in any organization, similarly public finance management is an essential
part of the governance process. Public finance management includes resource mobilization,
prioritization of programmes, the budgetary process, efficient management of resources and
exercising controls. Rising aspirations of people are placing more demands on the financial
"resources. At the same time the emphasis of the citizenry is on value for money, thus making
public finance management increasingly vital.
Elements ofR eforms in the Public Finance Management in Other Countries
The last few decades have witnessed large scale reforms in the public finance management
systems in most countries of the world. These reforms include taxation, monetary and
budgetary reforms. In line with its Terms of Reference, the Commission has focused on
budgetary processes and expenditure management in this Report.
Core Principles ofR eforms
The Commission broadly endorses the common elements of the budgetary reforms
suggested by the OECD Member countries. The Commission feels that after incorporating
suitable additions relevant to the Indian context, these could constitute the core principles
for reforming the financial management system in the country. These core principles are
described below:
i. Reforms in Financial Management System is part of overall governance
reforms: Governance reforms to bring about improved transparency, greater
accountability, streamlining the structure of the Government, elimination
of corruption, and fiscal and environment sustainability have to be backed
up by reforms in the financial management system in order to deliver the
Iii

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
desired results. At the same time it needs to be understood that reforms in the
management system are not an end in itself but a means to achieving good
governance.
ii. Sound financial management is the responsibility ofa ll government departments/
agencies: Maintaining financial prudence, discipline and accountability, while
at the same time, ensuring prompt and efficient utilization of resources towards
achieving organizational goals is the responsibility of all government agencies/
organizations and not only of the Finance wing/Finance Ministry.
iii. Medium-term plan/budget frameworks and aligning plan budgets and accounts:
Medium-term plan/budget frameworks attempt to bridge the gap between the
short-term time horizon of annual budgets with the medium term objectives
of the schemes and programmes of government. Even when there are medium
term frameworks like five year development plans, there is need for aligning the
annual budgets explicitly with the plans and with the accounting mechanisms
so that there is a clear 'line of sight' between the medium term developmental
plan and the annual budget exercise.
iv. Prudent economic assumptions: The economic assumptions that underline the
budget have to be prudent and accurate in order to ensure that the budgetary
estimates do not go haywire. The tendency to be overly optimistic has to be
avoided.
v. Top-down budgeting techniques: There is need to shift from the traditional
bottom up approach to budgeting to a top-down framework where the desired
outcomes should point to the resources required which should be allocated
thereafter at the macro level, sector-wise. This in turn would lead to focus on
outputs and outcomes rather than on inputs and processes.
vi. Transparency and simplicity: Budget documeOnts should be simple and easy
to comprehend and be available in the public domain. Also the procedures
involved in operating the budget and release of funds should be simple. Suitable
financial management information systems need to be developed in order to
ensure that all transactions are captured and ultimately made available for
public scrutiny.
vii. Relaxing central input controls: Government agencies need to be given greater
operational autonomy and flexibility by consolidating budget items and
decentralization of administrative and financial powers.

Strengthening Financial Management Systems
viii. Focus on results: Accountability in government needs to shift from compliance
with rules and procedures to achievement 9f results. This is all the more
necessary with relaxed central input controls. There should be emphasis on
'value for money'.
ix. Adopting modern financial management practices: Modern financial
management tools like accrual accounting, information technology, financial
information system etc. need to be used to improve decision making and
accountability. However, care needs to be exercised to ensure that congenial
environment is created and adequate capacity is developed before adopting
new practices.
x. Budgeting to be realistic: Unless the projections made in the budget are
reasonably accurate, the budgetary exercise lose credibility.
ANALYSIS OF THE BUDGETARY PROCESS
Weaknesses in the Budgetary System and Implementation
The Commission has analysed the recent Annual Budgets and their implementation and
has found that they have the following weaknesses:
i. Unrealistic budget estimates: The amounts budgeted are often not realistic.
Weakness in preparing proper estimates is leading to frequent revisions and
Supplementaries. On the other hand, there are major unspent provisions at
the end of the year.
ii. Delay in implementation of projects: Resources are being spread thinly with
only token provisions in some cases, often leading to inordinate delays in
execution of projects.
iii. Skewed expenditure pattern: The expenditure pattern is skewed, with major
portion getting spent in the last quarter of the financial year, especially in the
last month.
Inadequate adherence to the multi year perspective and Missing 'line of sight'
IV.
between plan and budget:. Though the Five Year Plan provides the basis for
multi~year perspective often adhoc deviations from it distort the long term
plan objectives. The Plan schemes get dispersed into line-items in the budget
estimates and there is no consolidation afterwards -both in the estimates and

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
the final accounts. There is need for alignment between the plan, budgets and
accounts.
v. No correlation between expenditure and actual implementation: The
expenditure figures do not reflect actual expenditure made towards receipt of
goods and services.
vi. Mis-stating of Financial position: parking of funds by implementing agencies,
outside the government accounts portrays an incorrect picture of the financial
position of government. This also means that the Government's financial
position is not known with reasonable accuracy at any given point of time.
vii. Adhoc project announcements: Indiscriminate announcement of projects/
schemes not included in plan/budget is regularly made, often without proper
consideration and detailing.
viii. Emphasis on compliance with procedures rather than on outcomes.
ix. Irrational plan / non-plan distinction leads to inefficiency in resource
utilization.
Unrealistic Budget Estimates:
In spite of repeated observations by the Public Accounts Commiittee, the Comptroller
and Auditor General of India and the Ministry,of Finance, Ministries/Departments are
actually not in a position to make a true assessment of fund requirement or gauge the
ground realities regarding implementation of schemes/programmes. The Commission is of
the view that the root cause of the problem lies in the prevalent method of formulation of
the annual budget by getting details from different organizations/units/agencies and fitting
them into a pre-determined aggregate amount leading to unrealistic budget estimates. This
method should be given up along with the method of budgeting on the basis of 'analysis
of trends'. Many countries have now adopted top-down budgeting techniques where a
medium-term expenditure framework provides baseline expenditure information leading
to fixing of the total level of expenditure (the medium-term perspective and expenditure
limits are discussed in paragraph 4.8 of this Report). This is then allocated among different
Ministries/Departments. These Ministries/Departments are thus free to reallocate moneys
among its various agencies or programmes in accordance with their priorities. In case a new
policy decision is made, it is funded by reallocations from other areas within the Ministry/
Department. The Finance Ministry, however, generally examines the appropriateness of

Strengthening Financial Management Systems
these reallocations. The Commission is of the view that such a 'top-down' method may be
adopted in India also. Further, it also needs to be ensured that assumptions made while
arriving at estimates are realistic.
Delay in Implementation ofP rojects
Another aspect of financial management concerns the delays in implementation of projects.
In fact, time and cost overruns have been a major problem affecting the central sector
projects. The analysis made by the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
shows that 308 projects have accounted for a cost over-run ofRs. 57,193 crore (Le. 49.48%)
with respect to their original sanctioned cost during the April-June, 200~ quarter.
The Report of the CAG on Union Government Accounts 2007-08 mentions that in a large
number of cases, many Ministries/Departments have reported that there were unspent
provisions due to various schemes not taking off. In many cases, such delays and unspent
provisions are due to token provisions made on account of ill-conceived or hastily conceived
projects which fail to take off leading to wastages on the one hand and tying scarce resources
on the other, thereby resulting in delayed implementation of other schemes/programmes
which are starved of funds.
Thus, the Commission feels that there is need for stricter adherence to project formulation
norms so that budgetary provisions are made only when administrative and technical
sanctions have been obtained and a detailed feasibility report and cost-benefit analysis
has been made. In the same vein, clear and unambiguous provisions should be made for
jettisoning of projects where justifiable reasons are on record. Further, a more strict regime
needs to be put in place to prevent cost and time over-runs which would contain measures
to deal with various factors causing delays in projects. However, there is also a need for
taking holistic approach as there is a whole host of factors, apart from financial constraints,
which leads to delays in implementation of projects.
Skewed Expenditure Pattern -Rush ofE xpenditure towards the End oft he Financial Year
There is a tendency to incur a significant part of the annual expenditure in the last quarter
of the financial year, especially during the month of March.
A modified exchequer control based expenditure management sy em was put in place
in December, 2006 to curb this rush of expenditure in the last quarter of the financial
year. The Modified Cash Management System seeks to achieve, inter alia, the following
objectives -

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
i. Obtaining greater evenness in the budgeted expenditure within the financial
year, especially in respect of items entailing large sums of advance releases and
transfers to corpus funds
ii. Reducing rush of expenditure during the last quarter, especially the last month
of the financial year.
iii. Reducing tendency of parking of funds.
iv. Effectively monitoring the expenditure pattern.
v. Better planning of Indicative Market Borrowing Calendar of the Union
Government.
Under the new system, savings would not be available for automatic carry forward to the
next quarter. The Department / Ministry concerned has to approach the Ministry of Finance
for revalidation of such savings. Further even in case of Demand for Grants not covered
by the modified exchequer management system, the expenditure in the last quarter of the
financial year may not exceed 33 per cent of the budget allocation.
The modified exchequer based expenditure management is basically a Cash Management
System which emphasises the time value of money. The Ministries/Departments covered
under the Cash Management System are required to annex a Monthly Expenditure Plan
(MEP) along with their Detailed Demand for Grants. By identifying specific Demands for
Grants, it aims at ensuring greater evenness in the budgeted expenditure within the year
especially in respect of items entailing large sums of advance releases. Thus, it enables the
Ministry of Finance and the Reserve Bank of India to plan their market borrowing calendar
based on more predictable patterns of cash flows.
However, in spite of this cash management system, these targets have not been achieved in
many cases. For example, the actual expenditure (Plan expenditure) up to December 2007
in case of Ministries/ departments having a BE of more than Rs. 1000 crore shows that in
the FY 2007-08, a number of Ministries/departments were not able to spend 670/0 of the
BE (Plan expenditure) in the first three quarters of the year.
Thus, it is seen that tne rush of expenditure in the last quarter of the financial year and
especially in the month of March continues. While the Modified Cash Management

Strengthening Financial Management Systems
System introduced in some Demands for Grants has shown improvement in this area, the
Commission feels that there is still scope for further improvement in this regards. It is also
of the view that apart from stricter adherence to the system, there is need for its extension
to all Demands for Grants as soon as possible.
Inadequate Adherence to the Multi-year Perspective and Missing Line of Sight between Plan
and Budget
Multi-year budgeting addresses the basic problem faced in budgeting - how to integrate
planning and budgeting. Multi-year budgeting essentially refers to budgeting in the medium
term, i.e., a perspective covering 3 to 5 years including the current year budget. A medium
term perspective for budgeting becomes necessary because a single year budget is not
sufficient to meet the expenditure priorities. Given the rigidity of committed expenditures
and their large share in the budget, success of any new programme and associated adjustments
in expenditure priorities require several years beyond the annual budget. The preparation
of rolling multi-year expenditure planning leads to improvement in budget preparation
by providing advance expenditure ceilings to the departments, increasing predictability of
resource availability, and by improving efficiency of public spending. Today, a realistic multi
year budget framework (medium term) is considered as the cornerstone of performance
oriented budgeting, linking resources to policy objectives that defines performance.
In India the Five Year Plans provide the basis for a medium term multi-year perspective for
resource allocation. On the basis of this, each year the Planning Commission in consultation
with the Ministry of Finance allocates annual limits for plan expenditures to each Ministry/
Department. It has been noticed, however, that often, major projects and schemes are
launched by government which are not provided for in the plan. This results in change in
allocation for other projects and schemes thereby diluting plan objectives.
Another weakness of the current budget exercise is the absence of a clear link between the
plan and the budget. While preparing the budget estimates, the allocations indicated by
the Planning Commission get dispersed over various heads and sub-heads of expenditure.
Further, while the plans are formulated scheme-wise and sector-wise, the budgets are
formulated under different heads and sub-heads which is also the case with accounts. Thus,
in the Indian context also, a 'clear line of sight' is not present. Consequently, even the final
accounts reflect the expenditure only under carious heads. This makes it difficult to link
the expenditure under various heads to the objectives sought to be achieved by the different
developmental schemes/projects. Thereby the accounting process loses its potential as a
measuring tool for achievement of government objectives.

Reports of the Admini~trive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Accounting is an integral part of the budgetary process. A good accounting system should
be able to reflect the objectives of any amount being spent by government, where and how
the amount is spent and finally what have been the results of any such expenditure. For
the accounting exercise to be meaningful it should be able to measure the extent to which
the results envisaged from expenditure have been achieved.
The Commission is of the view that the developments in the UK need examination in the
Indian context, especially the need and ways for having similar medium term expenditure
limits for Ministries/Departments through the Five Year Plans and linking them to annual
budgets with carry forward facility in relation to funds for plan schemes. Further, to bring
about clarity, transparency and consolidation, a similar 'alignment' project with regard
to the plan, budgets and accounts may be required to be implemented in India too. The
Commission is of the view that a High Powered Committee should be constituted to
examine and recommend on these issues.
No Correlation between Expenditure and Actual Implementation
At present the release of funds from any head of account is deemed as an expenditure. In a
large number of cases, especially in Centrally Sponsored Schemes, such releases cannot be
construed as expenditure because funds lie in the pipeline with various project authorities
and there is considerable lag before they are actually utilized. Thus the accounts do not
reflect the correct position as regards the implementation of government schemes and
programmes.
Mis-stating ofF inancial position
The present system of release of funds to project authorities outside the government often
leads to parking of funds. Such parking of funds is often resorted to in order to prevent
lapsing of funds. This leads to idle funds being maintained outside government accounts
and thus portrays an incorrect picture of government funds besides causing loss of interest
to government.
Adhoc Project Announcements:
Even though detailed exercises are made over a length of time to prepare and get the Five
Year Plans approved by the National Development Council and the Union and State
Cabinets, projects and schemes are announced on an ad-hoc basis in almost every budget
of the Union and the States. They are also announced on important National Days (e.g.
Independence Day, Republic Day, birthday of Mahatma Gandhi etc.) and during visits
of high-level functionaries to States, in the form of 'packages'. Such announcements of

Strengthening Financial Management Systems
large sums seriously distort the plan allocations and disturb the faithful implementation of
schemes already approved and under implementation. This also leads to announcements
not being followed by formal approvals thereby resulting in discontent and disaffection. The
proper method would be to include projects that may ~e considered absolutely essential at
the time of preparing the annual plans or during the mid-term appraisal.
Emphasis on Meeting Budgetary Financial Targets rather than on Outputs and Outcomes:
At present government departments often measure their performance in relation to the
expenditure targets laid down in the budget without adequate regard to outputs and even less
to outcomes. Furthermore little emphasis is placed on efficient utilization of resources.
Outcome Budget
1. Due to the realisation that 'certain weaknesses ... have crept in the performance
budget documents such as lack of clear one-to-one relationship between the
Financial Budget and the Performance Budget and inadequate target-setting
in physical terms for ensuing years' it was felt that there was need for tracking
'outcomes' and not the readily measurable 'outputs'.
It has been recognised that converting 'outlays' into 'outcomes' is a complex process
addressing "value for money" concerns; being more a management process than merely a
financial process and admitting possibilities of different approaches and modalities, which
may differ from Ministry to Ministry and programme to programme. The preparation
of the Outcome Budget is an evolving and dynamic process, which will require detailed
scrutiny and examination on yearly basis, with value addition based on the preceding year's
experience.
'Outputs' have been defined as the 'measure of the physical quantity of the goods or services
produced through an activity under a scheme or programme'. They are identified as an
intermediate stage between 'outlays' and 'outcomes'. For example, in case of a social sector
programme/scheme, the intermediate results before identifying, measuring and arriving at
the 'final outcome' as per the objectives of the said programme/scheme, may be treated as
'output'. The purpose is to capture intermediate 'outputs' before identifying and measuring
the 'final outcome'.
'Outcomes' are the end productslresults of various Government initiatives and interventions,
including those involving partnership with the State Governments, Public Sector
Undertaking, Autonomous Bodies, private sector and the community. They involve much
more than mere 'outputs', since they cover the quality and effectiveness of the goods or

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
services produced as a consequence of an activity under a scheme or programme. The
'outcomes' are required to be measured keeping in mind the objectives of the programme/
scheme by following appropriate methodology.
The Commission is of the view that the Outcome Budget cannot be prepared for all
Ministries/departments simply by way of declaration. It's a complex process and a number
of steps are involved before it can be attempted with any degree of usefulness. In many cases,
the 'outcomes' would influence and be influenced by developments in other sectors. For
example, rural electrification would influence the outcome of schemes related toeducation,
health, irrigation and agriculture, to name a few. The view of the Commission is that a
beginning may be made with proper preparation and training in case of the Flagship
Schemes and/or certain national priorities.
Irrational 'Plan - Non Plan'Distinction Leads to Inefficiency in Resource Utilization
Since the Country follows a Plan based model of economy, the expenditure of Government
is divided into Plan and Non-Plan. As the name suggests, Plan expenditure is directly
related to expenditure on schemes and programmes envisaged in the Five Year Plans. Non
Plan expenditure is the expenditure incurred on establishment and maintenance activities.
Thus, 'Plan' in this context includes what is provided by the Planning Commission and
is included in the Five-Year Plan. Non-Plan expenditure covers expenditure on security,
interest payments and subsidies etc. The plan and non plan divide runs too deep to give
a comprehensive idea about resource availability to the departments at an early stage of
budget development. The dichotomy between plan and non-plan in expenditures has been
commented upon as an unnecessary development that has adverse effects on the quality of
public services. Moreover, in order to find funds for the plans, over the years a tendency
has developed to view non-plan expenditure as far less important and subject it to cuts and
economy measures, although many of them are vital in nature.
The plan non-plan distinction in expenditures needs to be abolished keeping in view its
impact on budget development and public service delivery. The departments should have
the flexibility in formulating their budgets with prior indication of resource availability.
FLOW OF FUNDS FROM THE UNION TO THE STATES - CENTRALLY
SPONSORED SCHEMES
Flow ofF unds related to Centrally Sponsored Schemes
The Centrally Sponsored Schemes (CSS) do not fall within the subjects allocated to Union
Government in List I of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution. However, they are

Strengthening Financial Management Systems
funded by the Union Government to achieve certain national objectives. The CSS have
formed an important part of successive Five Year Plans. & mentioned in Chapter 3, the
flow of funds from the Union Government to the ultimate implementing agencies for any
scheme is through one of these two channels:
i. Funds are transferred to the Consolidated Fund of the State Governments
which spend the money through the implementing agencies. In such cases, the
agency banks at the field level honour the payment claims made by a~thorized
officers of the State Government and in return place the claim on the State
Government through the RBI office at the State Headquarters.
ii. The Union Government transfers funds directly to implementing agencies in
the States through normal banking channels. These agencies distribute funds
progressively to lower level field formations through banking channels. The
banks honour cheques up to the amount lying at credit in respective bank
accounts.
Actual expenditure under the CSS is incurred only when payment is made either to a
beneficiary of the scheme or to the supplier of goods and services. However, due to lack of
a proper information system, the tracking of fund flow and correlation between the amount
released and expenditure made could not be determined without a degree of uncertainty.
Further, when funds are transferred directly to the implementing agencies in the States,
it has to be done in advance which results in a substantial accumulation of funds in the
pipe line.
The CAG in its Report has mentioned that more than 50,000 crores is being released by the
Central Government to State and District level bodies directly and a significant portion of
this amount remains unutilized at different levels. The practice to transfer funds directly to
state and district level bodies, non-governmental organizations, societies etc. is motivated by
the desire to avoid delays on the one hand and prevention of diversion of these funds by the
State Governments in order to support their 'ways and means' position. There is no doubt
that when funds are transferred to the Consolidated Fund of the States, it leads to legislative
approval and appropriations at two stages. Thus, in case of the centrally sponsored schemes,
first the appropriations are approved by the Parliament in case of the Union Government
Ministries / Departments and Second when they are transferred to the consolidated fund
of the States, the appropriation are again required to be approved by the State Legislature
before they funds could be transmitted to implementing agencies. However, this has led to
a position where transparency and accountability are not being ensured leading to a failure
in getting a complete picture of expenditure related to these schemes.
I
I I

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
In fact, the existing system of accounting for plan schemes in case of both the Union and
State Governments does not adequately support informed planning, budgeting, effective
monitoring and decision making. The present accounting system does not capture
transaction - oriented information.
Absence ofa system for managing the flow off inancial information
The existing system of expenditure classification is one-dimensional as it flows only in the
direction namely from the fund to the sector/sub-sector. It does not permit an integration
and consolidation with regard to functions, programmes and economic categories in a single
hierarchy. Presently, budget classification focuses on compliance rather than on government
policies and priorities and the two main dimensions (function/programmes and objects)
are clubbed together with a 15 digit accounting code, which has limited flexibility and
scope for segregating and correlating various budget dimensions. Thus, it does not allow
capture of information regarding:
~ Schemes as defined by Planning Commission (Schemes defined in Chart of
Accounts are often not the same as defined by Planning Commission)
~ Recipient agency identification
~ Geographical location identification
The Commission has recommended the examination of the 'line of sight' project (,alignment'
project) of the UK Government in the Indian context by a High Powered Committee. It is
of the view that first, a reform in the structure of the Chart ofA ccounts and its codification
has to be carried out in order to arrive at an alignment between the Plan, budget and the
accounts. Further, it needs to be ensured that the IT based systems being thought of for
implementing the CAS are in tune with the National e-Governance Plan (NeGP), and take
advantage of the connectivity offered by SWAN and the CSCs.
Article 150 of the Constitution provides that the accounts of the Union and of the States
are to kept in such form as the President may, on the advice of the C&AG, prescribed. By
incorporating Entry 7 A (i) in the Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules in case
of the Department of Expenditure, The Controller General ofA ccounts has been delegated
to carry out the business of prescribing 'General principles of accounting' relating to the
Union or State Governments and form of accounts'. The Commission is of the view that
the Controller General of Accounts, in consultation with the C&AG should lay down the
..
principles for implementing the new system of transfer of funds mentioned in the fore-going
1m

Strengthening Financial Management Systems
paragraphs taking into account the available techndlogy, the modifications required in the
Chart of Accounts and should implement the system within a prescribed timeframe.
Development ofF inancial Information System
The Commission is of the view that a robust financial information system needs to be
created in the government. This system should also make accessible to the public real time
data on government expenditure at all levels an should be avail~ble in the public domain.
Thi.s would also be honouring the spirit of the Right to Information which mandates that
.
government organizations should attempt to provide maximum information through
voluntary disclosures.
Capacity Building
The changes in the accounting and financial management system discussed above would
necessitate capability building in not only the accounts and finance personnel but also
non-finance personnel. Better skills would allow better preparation of estimates and better
management of expenditure. A lot would require to be done for improving the estimating
and forecasting capabilities within Ministries/departments and implementing agencies.
Specially designed and periodic training modules for personnel at different levels need to
be designed to meet these needs.
The Commission is of the view that major reforms in financial management can only be
undertaken if capacity of both - individuals and institutions - is improved. For this to
happen, a proper programme of training needs to be devised and implemented in a time
bound manner.
ACCRUAL SYSTEM OF ACCOUNTING
Both the General Accounting Rules, 1990 and General Financial Rules, 2005 prescribe cash
based accounting in the Government. The basic reasons for maintaining accounts of the
Government on cash basis and its 'fundamental' difference with commercial accounting has
been succinctly analysed in the 'Introduction to Indian Government Accounts and Audit'
issued by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
Accounting in Commercial Undertakings oft he Government
Only in case of certain commercial undertakings of the Government, are the accounts
maintained in a manner as to reflect the true outcome of the commercial enterprise.
However, these accounts are kept separate from the normal Government accounts. A classic

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
example of such accounts is presented by the Railway Accounts. As the Indian Railways
function as a 'Departmental Commercial Enterprise', there is need for securing the essential
requirements of commercial accounting apart from conforming to the norms of Government
accounting. This is achieved in the Railway Accounts by keeping the accounts of the railways
on a commercial basis outside the regular Government account and by maintaining a link
between the two for necessary correlations. Thus, the accounts which facilitate a review of
the finances of the railways as a commercial undertaking are known as 'Capital and Revenue
Accounts' which are compiled annually and included in the Annual Report of the Railways.
On the other hand, the accounts maintained in accordance with the requirements of the
government accounts are collectively termed as the 'Finance Accounts'.
Unlike, Government accounts which record expenditure only when actually disbursed
or receipts only when actually realized, the commercial accounts of the railways record
the expenditure incurred or earnings accrued in a month irrespective of whether they
have actually been paid or realized. On the expenditure side, the revenue liabilities of the
Railways for a particular month, which are not payable within the same month, are brought
to account as working expenses for the month by taking contra credit to a suspense head
called 'Demands Payable'. When the liabilities are actually discharged by payments, the
suspense head is debited with that amount. Thus, the balance at the end of a particular
month in the suspense head represents liability incurred but not actually discharged
during that month. In case of earnings similar suspense account is maintained under the
head 'Traffic Accounts'. In case of wages and allowances for a month for labour another
suspense account is maintained under the head 'Labour'. These three accounts thus linked
the commercial accounts with the Government accounts.
Thus, basically the Railway Accounts follow a modified accrual system in their accounts
so that the performance of their commercial activities could be captured in a proper way.
However, this is maintained separately from the normal government accounts.
The Twelfth Finance Commission (2005-2010) in its Report has summed up the benefits
arising out of adoption of the a~crual system of accounting as follows:
"14.14 The cash based system of accounting lays emphasis on transactions vis-a.-vis
the budget. It does not record and report complete financial information required
for management of resources. It does not provide a full picture of the government's
financial position at any given point and the changes that take place over time as a
result of government policy. The system fails to reflect government's liabilities such
as accrued liabilities arising due to unfunded pensions and superannuation benefits
and current liabilities arising from a disconnect between commitments and payments.

Strengthening Financial Management Systems
Similarly, the present system is unable to track current assets as well as non-financial
assets. It does not provide information on the assets held by the government, much less
the cost of holding and operating these assets and the impact of current consumption
on the stock of assets. Another major limitation is its inability to record the full cost
of providing services by the government's departments or the commitments made
by the government regarding payment in future years. The cash based of accounting
provides room for fiscal opportunism, as tax revenues can be collected in excess during
a period followed by high incidence of refunds, payments can easily be deferred and
passed on to future periods, revenues due in the future could be compromised by
providing for one time payments, etc. To quote some other examples, it takes no note
of transformation of indebted government agencies into autonomous legal entities
outside government through suitable state guarantees, and on the expenditure side,
omit existing net liabilities of public enterprises and agencies outside the government,
though the latter cannot escape such liabilities.
14.15 Compared to the cash based system, the system of accrual accounting recognizes
financial flows at the time economic value is created, transformed, exchanged, transferred or
extinguished, whether or not cash is exchanged at that time. It is different from cash based
system in that it records flow of resources. Expenses are recorded when the resources (labour,
goods and services and capital) are consumed, and income when it is earned, i.e. when the
goods are sold or the services rendered. The associated cash flows generally follow the event
after some time and mayor may not take place during the same accounting period. Thus, in
addition to cash flow, unpaid consumptions (payables) and unrealized income (receivables)
are also recorded. Resources acquired but not fully consumed during an accounting period
are treated as assets (inventory and fixed assets). Payments made for acquisition ofinventory
are included in the operating cost for the period in which it is consumed. Payments made
for acquisition of physical assets, that have future service potential, are amortized over the
entire useful life of the asset by charging depreciation.
14.16The system of accrual accounting, thus, inter alia, allows better cost - price calculations,
records capital use properly, distinguishes between current and capital expenditures, presents
a complete picture of debt and other liabilities and focuses policy attention on financial
position, as shown in the whole balance sheet not just cash flows or debts. It gives a complete
measure of cost ofv arious services, takes care of disinvestment receipts and provides adequate
information of both fiscal balance and net worth and their changes over time. Information,
as would be available under accrual accounts, constitutes an essential input for bodies like
finance commissions, not only in assessing the revenue requirements of the centre and
states vis-a.-vis the available resources, but also in appraising their fiscal performance with a

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
vie~ to assigning due credit to-the governments, which have performed well and providing
disincentives to those, which fail to measure up-to expectations .... "
However, in case of adoption of the accrual based system, first in government accounts,
and then in budgeting, some pertinent aspects would need to be addressed:
i) There is a high cost of transition from cash based to accrual based accounting
system as it requires higher level of trained and skilled personnel, and higher
cost are involved in identification and evaluation of assets and setting up the
technological infrastructure.
ii) The transition period takes a fairly long time to settle, sometimes even more
than a decade.
A number of activities associated with accrual based accounting system involve high level of
subjectivity for example valuations and risk assessment. The nature disclosures and reporting
could change substantially based on such valuations and assessments. Robust accounting
framework for implementing such a system is also required.
International experie~ce also indicates various complexities and risks involved. For
example:
1. Many countries have attempted to move towards accrual accounting but success
has not been widespread. For example, even among the OEeD countries,
Germany and Italy are yet to decide on the transition. The Netherlands has
retracted its steps because of the costs involved. Japan has decided not to go
for it, at least for the present. South Africa has reverted back after actively
pursuing it.
2. Even in countries where the system has been imple~ented, the cost of
implementation has been high and the system has stabilized in about a decade.
However, it has not conclusively been shown that the information provided
by accrual accounting system is being used in decision making.
3. Different countries have followed different approaches to adopting accrual
accounting. In Australia, accrual accounting was first implemented at the
provincial level and later at the national level. In the U.K, although departments
prepare accrual based accounts, there is no consolidation of these accounts at
the national level.

Strengthening Financial Management Systems
The enormity of the last mentioned task was also realized by the Twelfth Finance Commission.
Thus, it stated that ~'The change over to the accrual based system of accounting will place
considerable demands on the accounting personnel in various government o'rganizations,
particularly at the lower and middle levels of accounting hierarchy, consisting of accounts
clerks, accountants, assis~ants, treasury officials and others." As mentioned earlier, to be
able to derive meaningful inferences from the new system of accounts and to see through
window dressing exercises, all the stake holders involved in the decision making process
in the government including J?arliament and public at large would have to ~e. aware of the
intricacies involved. Realising this, the Twelfth Finance Commission also observed that
"however, the transition would oc'cur in stages, as this is a time consuming prqcess. While
we are in favour of a change over to the accrual based system of accounting in the medium
term, we suggest that in the interim, some additional information as mentioned below in
the form of statements should be appended to the present system of cash accounting to
enable more informed decision making. An illustrative list of statements, which could be
included are:
a statement of subsidies given, both explicit and implicit;
a statement containing expenditure on salaries by various departments / units;
detailed information on pensioners and expenditure on government pensions;
data on committed liabilities in the future;
statement containing information on debt and other liabilities as well as repayment
schedule;
accretion to or erosion in financial assets held by the government including those
arising out of changes in the manner of spending by the government;
implications of major policy decisions taken by the government during the year or
new schemes proposed in the budget for future cash flows; and
statement on maintenance expenditure with segregation of salary and non-salary
portions."
So far as accrual system is concerned, it is observed that while its implementation has been
costly and time consuming in countries where it has been adopted, empirical evidence of
its benefits has not been conclusively demonstrated. Its implementation also places a high
premium on capacity building, both in case of institutions and personnel. Views have also
been expressed about limitations in its usefulness if the system of accounting does not cover
the budgeting system also. The Commission has considered the views from both sides of
the debate. It is of the view that while adopting the accrual system of accounting may be

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
the ultimate objective in case of government accounts, in the present scenario the following
steps would first need to be taken:
i. Setting up of a Task Force to examine the costs and benefits of this system, not
only in the accounts but also in the budget documents.
ii. A few departments/organizations may be identified where tangible benefits
could be shown to be derived by implementing the new system within 2-3
years, especially departmental 'commercial undertakings'.
iii. The result may be studied by a committee of experts which would recommend
or otherwise its further implementation in all departments/organisations at the
Union/State level along with exclusions, if any. This may proceed in a phased
manner.
iv. Training and capacity building needs of the accounting personnel and all
stake holders in the decision making process would have to be addressed and
a schedule worked out in line with the road map.
v. Before the new system is adopted, alignment of the plan, budget and accounts
needs to be achieved and a viable financial information system needs to be put
in place.
INTERNAL CONTROL AND AUDIT
Introduction
Internal control systems are basically management control systems with a view to ensuring
compliance with rules and regulations, reliability of financial data and reports, and to
facilitate efficiency of government operations. A sound internal control framework, of
which internal audit is an important element, is required to assure that government
operations attain some basic fiduciary standards in guarding against misuse and inefficient
use of resources; for safeguarding government assets; countering fraud and error; checking
maintenance of satisfactory accounting records; and whether budgetary objectives set out in
the government policies are being achieved. Thus, "Internal controls can be regarded as one
of the foundations of good governance and the first line of defense against improprieties.
They also provide the public with 'reasonable assurances' that if improprieties do occur,
they will be made transparent and made appropriately addressed."

Strengthening Financial Management Systems
Though internal audit is also a part of internal control system, it has a distinct role in that
it is one of the tools for evaluating and improving the internal control system. Internal
audit in government also involves audit on the basis of standards of financial propriety (as
does the external audit) and, therefore, is required to observe upon cases of improprieties
in financial operations.
The function of audit has been entrusted to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India
by the Constitution. Internal audit, as the name suggests, has to be a part of the government
organization. Presently, in Government of India, this function is discharged by the Office of
the Controller General of Accounts in the Ministry of Finance through Chief Controllers/
Controllers of Accounts in different Ministries/departments.
The overall responsibility of internal audit lies with the concerned Financial Adviser and
ultimately with the Secretary of the Ministry/department.
Whereas the original mandate of internal audit was to ascertain whether the rules and
regulations have been followed and procedures in accounting and financial matters have been
complied with, the revised charter includes appraisal and evaluation of individual schemes,
assessment of adequacy of internal controls, monitoring of risk factors, efficiency etc.
International best practices suggest that internal audit units, although being part of their
respective organizations, are designed to provide independent assessment of government
financial operations and programmes and prevent and identify frauds. The overall objective
is to assist the management in improving performance and increasing efficiency and reducing
risk. It is evident that the present situation in India is not in harmony with international
best practices.
In order to benchmark the status of internal audit in the Union Government and
determination of roadmap for its improvement, the Comptroller and Auditor General of
India constituted a Task Force on 17 July, 2006 at the request of the Ministry of Finance,
Department of Expenditure.
There are serious deficiencies in the existing internal audit system making it inadequate and
ineffective. The internal audit guidelines are outdated and there are no manuals in many
cases. There are also no prescribed internal auditing standards. Because of the acknowledged
problem of under-resourcing of the internal audit service and shortage of manpower,
including that of qualified professional staff, internal audit is not being conducted in many
departments. The limited staff of the internal audit is also sometimes diverted for accounting

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
and budgeting purposes. In cases where internal audits have been conducted, there is often
lack of response to their reports by auditee units. As a result action is not taken to rectify the
deficiencies and irregularities and deficiencies pointed out persist. A large number of Central
and State scheme and programmes as well as Public Sector Undertakings and Autonomous
Bodies have also been kept out of the purview of internal audit. At supervisory level, there
is no segregation of d~ties . elating to internal audit and other accounting functions. The
repons of internal audit are of a routine nature. It is largely a faultfinding exercise with
no positive recommendations. Extremely low priority is accorded to internal audit and
resources allocation for internal audit both in terms of manpower and finances.
The Commission has examined this issue. It is of the view that if internal audit has to
function independently of both Finance and Accounts, the concept of Board of Internal
Audit (BIA) consisting of 'Controller General of Accounts, Controller General of Defence
Accounts, Financial Commissioner (Railways), Member Finance Telecommunication for
"oversight of internal audit in Government of India" and for prescribing standards, even
for an interim period, is not the right solution. In fact, the standards for internal audit
should be prescribed by the C & AG of India, as is the case in the US (the Inspector
General Act of 1978). Een the IG Act did not establish the Office of Inspector General in
each and every government organization at one go. The Commission is of the view that
an Office of Chief Internal Auditor should be established in select government Minstries/
departments dealing with major governmental programmes such as those under the 'Bharat
Nirman' initiative. Its duties and functions and independence should be provided under
a statute. These Chief Internal Auditors should be directly responsible to the Secretary
of the concerned Ministry/department. As provided in the IG Act in the US, the statute
should also contain provisions regarding ensuring that there is no duplication of work and
maintenance of proper coordination with the C&AG. The functioning and effectiveness of
this new system may be examined and a cost benefit analysis done after allowing a suitable
period of operation. Based on the outcomes of this examination, such offices may be
instituted in other Ministries/departments/ organisations. The personnel for these offices
may be inducted from existing accounts officers and given proper training. However, given
the magnitude of task of internal audit, the norms for using outside auditors may also be
provided. The Commission is also of the view that internal audit should not concern itself
with investigation of cases where irregularities are unearthed during audit. These may be
dealt with by appropriate agencies created for this. In fact, the Commission has already
recommended the formation of a specialised agency to deal with serious frauds in its Fourth
Report entitled 'Ethics in Governance'.

Strengthening Financial Management Systems
Audit Committees in Departments
Presendy, Audit Committees have been set up in various Ministries/Departments to review
the action taken on inspection reports and their speedy semement. They are normally chaired
by the Secretary or the Head of Department and are mosdy made up of senior officers of
the concerned Department and Finance. However, the performance of these Committees
has not been satisfactory and they have been far from effective.
The Commission is of the view that to effectively coordinate Audit plans iIi the department
with the internal audit structure on the one hand and external audit on the other, there
should be Audit Committees in each Ministry/Department. However, in order to make it
independent and effective, its structure needs to be reorganised. Thus, its Chairperson should
be a person of eminence in public life and should be appointed by the Minister in charge
of the Ministry/department. It should have two more members who should have expertise
in matters of audit and should not be from the government. The Audit Committee should
have an independent status and deal with matters related to both internal and external
audit. The departmental personnel should be duty bound to furnish information as and
when required by this Committee.
Integrated Financial Adviser
The Ministries in the Government of India had an internal financial adviser prior to 1975,
who was incharge of their Budget and Accounts. The internal financial adviser was required
to be consulted in all cases of exercise of delegated financial powers. There was also an
~sociate' Financial Adviser based in the Department of Expenditure who was required to
be consulted in matters following outside the delegated field. In 1975, the question whether
the functions of the ~sociate' financial adviser and the internal financial adviser could, with
advantage be integrated in a single official forming part of the administrative Ministry was
considered. It was felt that combining the two functions in a single official would enable
him/her to playa more effective and constructive role in the developmental activities in the
Ministry and provide better financial expertise in assisting the Secretary of the administrative
Ministry and other senior officers in the planning, programming, budgeting, monitoring
and evaluation functions of the Ministry. Therefore, a scheme integrated Financial Adviser
was drawn up and implemented in 1975. The Integrated Financial Adviser was responsible
both to the administrative Ministry and to the Ministry of Finance.
The entire scheme of the Integrated Financial Adviser was reviewed in 2006. The overarching
concept in re-defining the chart~r for financial adviser was that they are meant to assist
in the achievement of objectives/goals of the respective administrative ministry with due

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
financial prudence and to ensure that monies allocated are spent on time to achieve the
intended outcomes. It was thought that the more complex responsibilities envisaged for
FAs inus~ be a2compani,ed'by corresp~nding authority and capacity.
, The Commission is of the view that there can be no room for doubt that the responsibility of
FA as the Chief Financial Officer of the Ministry or Department should be to the Secretary
of the Ministry/Department and the role of FA would be to support the Secretary of the
Ministry in discharging the responsibility for economical, efficient and effective use of
resources, effective internal controls and avoidance ofirregular and wasteful expenditure. The
Commission believes that it is important for the Secretaries of the concerned departments
as well as the Finance Ministry to recognize this and to discharge their responsibilities
accordingly so that the concept of dual responsibility of the FA to the administrative
Ministry as well as to the Ministry of Finance disappears once and for all. At the same
time it is essential that only officers with sufficient experience, knowledge and exposure to
modern financial management techniques are posted as Financial Advisers so that they are
able to effectively discharge the responsibilities of a Chief Financial Officer.
EXTERNAL AUDIT AND PARLIAMENTARY CONTROL
Importance ofE xternal Audit
External audit has a very important role to play in financial management, because it is a
means of:
(a) providing assurance to Parliament/Legislature that public money has been spent
for the purpose for which it was sanctioned by the / Parliament Legislature and
it has not only been properly spent but has achieved the purpose/ outcome for
which it was sanctioned.
(b) is crucial element of public accountability as it is an independent external
scrutiny. External audit is, therefore, deemed to be a key element in ensuring
proper accountability of the executive both to Parliament/ Legislature who
provide/ sanction resources and to the community at large including tax payers,
consumers and beneficiaries.
(c) is a deterrent against careless decision-making and irresponsible attitude on
public expenditure and project management.
(d) is expected to establish public confidence that public money is being properly
spent.

Strengthening Financial Management Systems
(e) is expected to help in achieving full value for money. External audit includes
examination of the economy, efficiency and effectiveness in the use of public
resources including the evaluation of service quality and measurement of
performance.
(f) adds value not merely by analysing and reporting what has happened after
the event but also by looking forward, identifying lessons to be learnt and by
disseminating good practices.
Types ofA udit
The role of audit in India has been constantly evolving. Initially, in the pre-Independence
period, audit was an integral organ of the Government keeping track of its expenditure and
receipts, checking and exercising control over expenditure incurred by various Departments
in accordance with rules, norms and instructions. In Independent India, planning and
development changed the audit perspective. It was realized that Regularity (Compliance)
Audit and Financial Audit were not enough to evaluate the results of expenditure out of
public funds. Performance Audit, slowly developed as an attempt to measure the economy,
efficiency and effectiveness of the Government expenditure. The following types of audit
are undertaken by the CAG:
• Performance Audit
• Regularity (Financial) Audit
• Regularity (Compliance) Audit
• IT Audit
Strengths ofE xternal Audit in India
The external audit by the CAG of India has many inherent strengths.
(i) The CAG has a high status enshrined in the Constitution and upheld by long
traditions of public audit in India. The institution of audit under the CAG
is often regarded as the fourth pillar in the democratic setup and an essential
instrument of financial control and accountability.
(ii) The Constitution of India ensures independence and autonomy of the public
audit.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
(iii) The expression 'Audit' or scope of the audit has not been defined either in
the Constitution or the CAG's DPC Act, 1971. The scope of external audit
is, therefore, open. Audit can respond to changes, reforms, new initiatives,
changing patterns of Government activities, international developments in
the profession and rising expectation of the stakeholders regarding public
accountability.
(iv) The CAG has the power to determine the nature and extent of audit and related
access to records and relevant information.
(v) The CAG has the inherent right to determine what should be included in the
Audit Reports.
(vi) There is a Requirement that Audit Reports should be tabled in the Parliament/
Legislature and thereafter these become public documents.
(vii) There are well documented Audit Manuals and audit guidelines for the Auditors
to follow.
(viii) Auditing Standards framed on lines ofINTOSAI (International Organization
of Supreme Audit Institutions) guidelines are available.
(xii) There are discussions in the Public Accounts Committee of the Parliament/
Legislature on the important observations contained in the Audit Reports.
Challenges before the External Audit
There is, however, a feeling that the impact/effectiveness of external audit could be further
enhanced. Some of the factors and perceptions, which are impeding the effectiveness of
external audit are given below.
(i) Detailed examination of paras included in the Audit Reports by Public Accounts
Committee is barely about 15-20 against the total number of 1000 to 1500
paras included in the CAG's reports submitted to the Parliament every year.
The Ministries/Departments take only those audit paras seriously which come
up for discussions in the PAC.
(ii) The Ministeries/Departments are supposed to submit Action Taken Notes on
the paras not discussed. Such Action taken Notes are largely formal rather than
substantive.

Strengthening Financial Management Systems
(iii) In the State Legislatures, there is a huge pendency ofA udit Paras to be examined
by State PACs. Some of the pending paras are 10 to 20 years old. Delay in
examination of matters brought out in the Reports reduces their relevance.
(iv) Thousands ofinspection reports containing a huge number of observations are
lying unattended in the State and Union Government Departments. Many of .
these paras have revenue implications. There is hardly any accountability for
not taking timely action on audit observations.
(v) There is a feeling that the CAG's reports are sometimes not timely. There is
substantial time gap between occurrence of an irregularity and its reporting
by Audit. It reviews programmes after these have run for a few years. CAG's
audit itself is post facto and by the time, the process of auditing and reporting
is completed, its findings and recommendations may be too late for corrective
action. Many transaction audit comments relate to earlier years and not the
year of the Audit Report.
(vi) Audit findings are based exclusively on documents and files. Many a times, the
situation on the ground is quite different from what is reflected in the papers.
There is practically no physical verification to supplement or validate the audit
findings.
(vii) There is a feeling that external audit reports tend to be unduly negative and
their focus is on irregularities and faultfinding. Audit does not always recognize
the practical constraints under which the Government/Government Agencies
function. This puts off the Executive:
• Audit does not discriminate between errors arising out of bonafide intentions
and malafide intentions.
• Government/Government Agencies are handicapped by unknown/
unforeseen problems, delays beyond their control and unexpected hurdles.
The auditors on the other hand have the benefit of hindsight. Audit as such
could act as a dampner against new initiatives and risk taking.
(viii) Audit Reports are not always presented in a sufficiently constructive manner,
as they often do not delve into the causes of the problems detected and how
to take care of the same.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
• Reporting each year a large number of problems which are already known
and which are not being addressed does not add value. Audit must identify
systemic problems.
• Findings are at times not focused and are in the nature of scattered
observations. A macro level view of the functioning of a department is
seldom available.
• Audit does not give due credit for good performance.
(ix) There is poor working relationship with the auditee, interaction is confined
mainly to the lower levels.
• Audit is viewed as a system for policing Government Organisations, the
feeling that audit is a valuable aid to management is missing.
• There is poor! inadequate response to external audit bordering sometimes
on indifference on the part of Government officials, which seriously reduces
the effectiveness of audit.
(x) Though Audit Committees comprising representatives of audit, executive and
finance departments have been set up to review the departmental action taken
on inspection reports/ recommendation, their functioning is not satisfactory.
(xi) There is lack of informed media coverage of CAG's reports on Union/ State
Governments.
• The extent of public interface between the auditors and civil society is poor.
Inspection reports are not in the public domain.
(xii) There is no synergy/ coordination between external audit and internal audit.
(xiii) External audit does not provide audit assurance on the fair presentation of
financial statements of the Government in accordance with stated accounting
principles and policies.
(xiv) There is hardly any audit of grants and loans to NGOs. Their number is very
large and on the increase. This could be a high risk area as even the certificate
of utilization of funds are reportedly not being furnished in a large number of
cases.

Strengthening Financial Management Systems
(xv) With privatization, globalization, public private partnership, computerization,
e-governance, greater devolution and decentralization, the audit has to change
its outlook and show more professionalism in its approach and work to meet
the challenge of fast changes, which are taking place.
Accountability to Parliament
Accountability of the Executive to the Parliament is ensured th~ough various institutional
mechanisms and procedures. The system of Parliamentary financial control works on the
basis of inter-dependent functions discharged by different institutions like Ministry of
Finance, Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG), its three Parliamentary Financial
Committees - Committees on Estimates, Public Accounts and Public Undertakings.
Committee on Public Accounts (PAC)
The provisions regarding the constitution and functions of these three Parliamentary
Committees are contained in the 'Rules of Procedure and COl\lduct of Business in 'Lok
Sabha'. Thus, Rule 308 provides that the Committee on Public Accounts shall examine the
'accounts showing the appropriation of sums granted by the House for the expenditure of
the Government of India, the annual finance accounts of the Government of India and
such other accounts laid before the House as the Committee may think fit'. In scrutinizing
the Appropriation Accounts of the Government of India and the Report of the C&AG
thereon, the Committee is enjoined to satisfy itself on the following:
a. that the moneys shown in the accounts as having been disbursed were legally
available for, and applicable to, the service or purpose to which they have been
applied or charged;
b. that the expenditure conforms to the authority which governs it; and
c. that every re-appropriation has been made in accordance with the provisions
made in this behalf under rules framed by competent authority.
Committee on Estimates
Rule 310 provides that a Committee on Estimate is to be constituted for the 'examination
of such of the estimates as may seem fit to the Committee or are specifically referred to it
by the House or the Speaker'. The Committee has the following functions:

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
a. to report what economies, improvements in organisation, efficiency or
administrative reform, consistent with the policy underlying the estimates,
may be effected;
b. to suggest alternative policies in order to bring about efficiency and economy
in administration;
c. to examine whether the money is well laid out within the limits of the policy
implied in the estimates; and
d. to suggest the form in which the estimates shall be presented to Parliament.
Committee on Public Undertakings (COPU)
Rule 312A provides for the constitution of a Committee on Public Undertakings for the
'examination of the working of the public undertakings' specified in the Fourth Schedule
to these Rules. This Fourth Schedule contains a list of all Public Undertakings established
by Central Acts. The Committee is empowered to examine the reports and accounts of the
public undertakings specified in the Fourth Schedule; examine the reports, if any, of the
Comptroller and Auditor-General on the public undertakings; examine, in the context of
the autonomy and efficiency of the public undertakings, whether the affairs of the public
undertakings are being managed in accordance with sound business principles and prudent
commercial practices; and exercise such other functions as allotted to it by the Speaker.
However, the Committee is excluded from examining the following:
i. matters of major Government policy as distinct from business or commercial
functions of the public undertakings;
ii. matters of day-to-day administration; and
iii. matters for the consideration of which machinery is established by any special
statute under which a particular public undertaking is established.
Departmentally related Standing Committees
To facilitate proper examination of different Demands for Grants leading to more
meaningful discussion in Parliament, the Rules were amended in 1993 to provide for
constitution and functions of Departmentally related Standing Committees (Rules 331 C
to 331N). Each of such Committees consist of not more than 31 members, 21 from Lok
Sabha and 10 from Rajya Sabha. The term of office of these Committees is one year. These
Standing Committees have the following functions:

Strengthening Financi.al Management Systems
a. to consider the Demands for Grants of the concerned Ministries/Departments
and make a report on the same to the Houses. (However, it has specifically
been mentioned that the "report shall not suggest anything of the nature of
cut motions");
b. to examine such Bills pertaining to the concerned Ministries/Departments as
are referred to the Committee by the Chairman, Rajya Sabha or the Speaker,
as the case may be, and make report thereon;
c. to consider annual reports of Ministries/Departments and make reports
thereon;
d. to consider national basic long term policy documents presented to the Houses,
if referred to the Committee by the Chairman, Rajya Sabha or the Speaker, as
the case may be, and make reports thereon.
However, the Rules also lay down that these Standing Committees shall not consider the
matters of day to day administration of the concerned Ministries/Departments. The general
procedure relating to Demands for Grants to be followed by these Standing Committees
is as follows:
a. after the general discussion on the Budget in the two Houses is over, the Houses
shall be adjourned for a fixed period;
b. the Committees shall consider the Demands for Grants of the concerned
Ministries during the aforesaid period;
c. the Committees shall make their report within the period and shall not ask for
more time;
d. the Demands for Grants shall be considered by the House in the light of the
reports of the Committees; and
e. there shall be a separate report on the Demands for Grants of each Ministry.
Parliamentary Control over Budgetary Policies-lessons from different countries
The Commission has considered diverse scenarios and is of the view that the present system
need not be tinkered with. The reforms suggested with regard to budgetary processes and
programme based outcome budget would provide succour to ex-ante strengthening of the
budgetary process.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Public Accounts Committee and CAG
The Audit Reports of the CAG upon their presentation to the Parliament/ Legislature
stand referred suo-moto to the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) for all matters except
the Reports on the commercial undertakings, which stand referred to the Committee on
Public Undertakings (COPU) of the Parliament/ Legislature.
The Reports of the CAG on the Union Government referred to the PACcontain about
1000-1500 paragraphs and performance audit reports every year. Out of these, the PAChas
been selecting for detailed examination about 25-30 paragraphs, but has been able to
discuss, with the concened Ministries/Departments, only between 10 and 15 paragraphs
out of those selected for detailed examination. This is despite the fact that successive PACs
have tried their best to discuss as many paragraphs as possible.
In order to strengthen parliamentary control over the executive it is necessary to devise
a system which envisages that PAC examines all the reports submitted by the CAG and
submits its recommendations to the Legislature within a stipulated time limit. It has already
been observed that this is possible only if the volume of CAG's Audit reports is reduced
and their quality and content improved.
The Commission is of the view that in order to strengthen the parliamentary oversight
mechanism, as many audit paras as possible should be examined by parliamentary
Committees. The PAC/COPU would decide in the beginning of the year itself, which
paras would be examined by it and which by its sub-committees (to be constituted for the
purpose). Other paras could be assigned for examination to the respective Departmentally
related Standing Committees. The objective would be to complete the examination of all
paras within one year. In exceptional cases, Chairman, PAC/COPU may authorize keeping
a para alive for more than one year. Thus, the PAC (or COPU) and its sub-committees
and the Departmentally related Standing Committees (and their sub-committees) should
be able to complete the examination within a year. If still there are pendencies, they may
be referred to the departmental Audit Committees.
Relationship between Audit and the Government/Government Agencies
There is need for better understanding and synergy between government agencies and audit
so that there is proper accountability and timely oversight and consequently better audit
impact. The information provided by the external audit is useful only if the executive acts
upon it.

Strengthening Financial Management Systems
Another area of concern is that audit is perceived as discouragement to innovate, change and
reform. This is because departments associate risk taking or innovations with the increased
possibility of something going wrong leading to financial loss and consequently their censure
by the audit. Therefore, before indicting an officer for an innovation or reform which may
be caused a financial loss, the audit should carefully examine whether the department had
taken adequate steps to identify the risks and planned suitably before carrying out the
reforms/innovations. If this had been done and no malafide is indicated then audit should
not be hasty to draw adverse conclusions.
There is a need for deepening and enhancing the level of interaction between audit and
the executive at the senior level. Audit should not remain isolated; While independence
of audit is crucial to objectivity, it should not mean isolation. There should be increasing
coordination with the executive. A concern has been that the public audit reporting is
unduly negative. While it is true that audit has a major role in ensuring accountability, this
does not mean a negative or only faultfinding approach.
The Commission is of the view that there is paramount need to sensitize the executive
towards the role and findings of audit so that the two sides realize that they are not working
at cross purposes but for the same objective of delivery of the programmes in a manner
which leads to achievement of objectives, outcomes and also promotes accountability.
Further, the Auditing Standards require Auditors to be careful to avoid offering implied
criticism in cases where although the original anticipations have not been realized, there
are no strong indications, significant or substantive of inefficiency or waste on the part of
the administrative authorities.
Audit organizations in all the developed countries have been moving towards positivism while
still maintaining their key role. Everybody is sensitive to criticism but amenable to reason and
logic and even ready to take corrective action. Rather than focus exclusively on irregularities,
external audit should conduct studies and evaluation of systems e.g. accounting, financial
management, internal control, risk management, contracting, procurement, etc. and offer
constructive suggestions for strengthening Government operations and reforms oriented
towards best practices. Audit should look at itself as an agency for change and improvement
rather than primarily detection of irregularities.
TImeliness ofA udit
There is a feeling that the CAG's Reports are not always timely. External Audit reviews
programmes after these have run for a few years. CAG's audit itself is post facto and by the

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
time, the process of auditing and reporting is completed, its findings and recommendations
are too late for corrective act,ion. There is substantial time gap ,between the occurrence of
an irregularity and its reporting ~y. ,audit ~hich dilutes the impact of the audit findings.
Concurrent Audit
While performance audit is mainly a posteriori exercise, there is no bar to conduct
performance audit of programmes concurrently, or at the initial stages of the implementation
of the programmes, in cases where the risk and materiality are perceived as being significant.
Concurrent performance audit of long-term on-going schemes should be undertaken at
appropriate intervals.
Major Policy Shift Issues
Accountants General and the SAl should be alive to major shifts in the policies and
programmes of the entity and the consequential new public sector programmes and select
critical cutting-edge subjects for performance audit in the context of policy changes.
Performance audit of such sunrise issues are likely to contribute value to the implementation
of the policy shifts.
With e-governance and Internet, apart from adjusting to the momentous speed of
communications, Government is gearing up to generate responses to various issues and
communications at a pace much faster than before. This will require audit to also review
its procedures to reduce/ compress the time lag between the occurrence of an event and
its reporting.
External audit has to spend considerable time on the audit of transactions because internal
audit arrangements in the State Government and in many Union Government Departments
are either weak or non-existent. Transaction audit is basically the job of internal auditors.
External audit is supposed to do only sample checking. If internal audit is strengthened,
CAG's audit will save considerable time spent on extensive audit of transactions.
Inadequate Response to Audit
While a proper external audit system is in place both at the Union and States, a common
perception is that it is not having the desired impact. The Departments do not send replies
even to draft paras intended for inclusion in Audit Reports or furnish Explanatory Notes
on paragraphs finally included in CAG's Reports. While there may be several reasons that
could be given for the general indifference to public audit reports, a primary reason for this

Strengthening Financial Management Systems
inadequate response to audit is that there are no significant consequences for non-compliance
with financial rules, regulations and procedures laid down by the Government.
The Government of India has prescribed that Ministries/ Departments must furnish replies
to the draft paragraphs which are forwarded to the Secretaries of the Ministries/ Departments
demi-officially within 6 weeks. A review of outstanding ATNs on paragraphs included in
the Reports of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India, Union Government (Civil,
Other Autonomous Bodies and Scientific Departments) as of October 2007 has disclosed
that the Ministries/Departments had not submitted remedial ATNs on 169 paragraphs.
The Commission feels that the pending paras could be monitored by having a database in
each Ministry/ Department of the pending audit paras. The number of audit paras pending
in respect of an officer with reasons and adequacy of response to audit should be an input
while appraising an officer. This will ensure better response and responsibility for taking
appropriate action. Also for persistent default in submitting replies to the audit paras a
procedure should be laid,down for action against concerned officers.
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT IN STATE GOVERNMENTS
The Commission has not examined the States' budgets in detail, but it feels that the
weaknesses highlighted and the core principles stated earlier would apply to the financial
management systems in the States. Some of the issues which need to be addressed by the
State Governments are.
Integrated Financial Advisers
The same compulsion that made the Union Government implement the scheme of Integrated
Financial Adviser for assisting administrative ministries in planning, programming and
budgeting should now be the reason for State Governments to introduce the system of FA in
various departments where FAs would be the representatives of the Finance Department.
Multi-year Budgeting
Along with the introduction of the FA system, multi-year budgeting would help in bringing
about better fiscal discipline and financial management.
Realistic Estimates and Proper Assumptions while Preparing Budget
There is need to have economic assumptions which are prudent and realistic in order to
formulate budget estimates which are accurate and not overly optimistic. At the end of every

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
financial year, the gap between the estimates and the actuals should be analysed so that the
underlying economic assumptions could be suitably calibrated for the future.
Avoiding Ad hoc Announcements Token Provisions
In States also, in spite of detailed instructions and guidelines in budget manuals, projects
and schemes are announced on an ad-hoc basis duriI1g visits of high-level functionaries. The
practice of announcing projects and schemes on an ad-hoc basis needs to be abandoned.
Skewed Expenditure Pattern
As in the case of Union government, the expenditure pattern of the State Governments
is also highly skewed with the bulk of expenditure taking place in the last quarter and
particularly in the month of March. Government of India has tried to overcome this
problem by introducing the Monthly Expenditure Plan (MEP). A similar system should
be adopted by the States.
Internal Control
The weaknesses of the internal audit system have been brought out by the CAG through
its various Reports.
The current internal audit arrangements are inadequate and ineffective. It is not even being
conducted in some departments. Internal audit guidelines are outdated and there are no
internal audit manuals in many cases. There is an acknowledged problem of under-resourcing
of the internal audit service. There is shortage of manpower and often lack of qualified
and professional staff, the capacity of staff is inadequate, and supervision is weak. There
is lack of response to internal audit reports by auditee units. A large number of internal
audit reports and observations remain pending. No effective action is taken to rectify the
deficiencies. Because of lack of action on internal audit observations, the irregularities and
deficiencies pointed out persist.
It is therefore necessary to develop a strategic view of internal audit to move beyond the
financial regularity and compliance audit to exert a wider role. The Commission has
suggested constitution of audit committees in respect of Government of India. Therefore,
same could be considered by the State Governments.
External Audit
The Public Accounts Committees in some States have a practice of examining all paragraphs
and performance audit reports included in the CAG's Audit Reports, while others have

Strengthening Financial Management Systems
adopted the selective approach. In the former case, due to the volume of work involved,
the Reports of the CAG are sometimes not discussed for years together, often upto 10-15
years and the arrears keep mounting. The approach of discussing all the paragraphs in the
order of the year of their presentation often results in examination of matters as old as 10-20
years many of which may have lost their relevance due to the lapse of time. In other State
Legislatures, where selective approach is adopted, the status on effectiveness is similar to
the one in the case of the Central PAC/ COPU.
To overcome the situation, the Legislative Committees may like to adopt a time frame within
which they would complete examination of audit reports also and submit their reports to
the Legislature. The State Governments may also specify a time frame for the Departments
for necessary follow up action on the recommendations of Audit and forwarding of the
ATNs for vetting to the Accountant General before their final submission to the State
PAC/ COPU. It is also necessary to ensure that all Departments adhere to the prescribed
time limits.

STATE AND DISTRICT ADMINISTRATION
Constitutional guarantees and provisions, Union and State laws as well as policies and
programmes for economic and social development are relevant to the daily lives of the
people only to the extent they are implemented honestly and efficiently. The Constitution
of India gives a special role and responsibility to the State Governments for preserving public
order and ensuring the welfare of citizens. The Seventh Schedule which clearly demarcates
the legislative and functional domain of the Union and the States, highlights the critical
role envisaged for State Governments in fulfilling the aspirations set out in the Directive
Principles of State Policy. -
So far the Commission has submitted fourteen Reports, each of them containing
recommendations to be acted upon by the Union, State, District and Local Governments -
by one or all of them - as well as by institutions of civil society. The Reports dealt with:-
(i) Right to Information;
(ii) Implementation of NREGA;
(iii) Crisis Management;
(iv) Ethics in Governance;
(v) Public Order;
(vi) Local Governance;
(vii) Capacity Building for Conflict Resolution;
(viii) Combatting Terrorism;
(ix) Social Capital;
(x) Refurbishing of Personnel Administration;
(xi) Promoting e-Governance;
(xii) Citizen Centric Administration

State and District Administration
(xiii) Organisational Structure of Government of India
(xiv) Strengthening of Financial Management Systems
While contemplating reforms in the State and District Administration, all the above Reports
of the Commission need to be considered together. There are some areas in which action
needs to be taken primarily by the Union Government; in such cases, the States' role would
be to provide support and cooperation to the latter in the measure taken to implement
the recommendations. Whereas, measures suggested in Reports on "Public Order", "Local
Governance", "NREGA", "Crisis Management" and "Conflict Resolution" have a direct
bearing on the State and District administration; and hence appropriate reform actions have
to be initiated by the State governments themselves. In addition, the principles enunciated
in several other Reports such as those dealing with "Right to Information", "Citizen Centric
Administration", "e-Governance" and "Social Capital" have overarching relevance to the
State and District administration.
RESTRUCTURING STATE GOVERNMENTS
The Commission has analysed the following major aspects of State Administration in this
Report:
(i) Size of the Council of Ministers
(ii) Rationalizing the number of Secretariat Departments
(iii) Executive Agencies
(iv) Internal restructuring of the State Government Departments.
(v) State Civil Service Law
(vi) Appointment and security of tenure at senior levels in the State Government
(vii) State Public Service Commissions
2.13.2 Size o/the Councilo/Ministers
Over a period of time, pardy due to administrative needs and pardy due to compulsions of
coalition politics, there has been a significant proliferation of Ministers and Departments in
almost all the States. This proliferation has led to administrative fragmentation. The present
size of the Council of Ministers, in the States, more so in the larger ones, appears t~ be
disproportionate, particularly in view of the establishment of the third tier of Government,
, I

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
to whom substantive powers and functions have to be devolved as mandated by the
Constitutional 73rd and 74th Amendments.
As per Article 164(lA), the total number of Ministers including the Chief Minister, in the
Council of Ministers in a State shall not exceed 150/0 of the total number of members of
the Legislative Assembly of that State provided that the number of Ministers, including
the Chief Minister in a State shall not be less than twelve. In case of smaller States like
Sikkim, Mizoram and Goa where the strength of the Assembly is 32, 40 and 40 respectively,
a minimum strength of 7 for the Council of Ministers has been provided.
It may be pertinent to recall that the National Commission to Review the Working of the
Constitution had suggested that the size of the Council of Ministers should not be more
than 10 per cent of the total strength of the lower House, the Lok Sabha at the Centre and
the Legislative Assembly in the States.
The Commission feels that a compact and small sized Council of Ministers is one of the
essential requirements of good governance and as indicated earlier the current ceiling of
15% which has been imposed by Article 164(lA), appears to be somewhat excessive for
many of the States.
In order to arrive at some rational criteria for reducing the size of the Council of Ministers,
the Commission feels that all the 28 States of the country could be conveniently placed in
three groups on the basis of the strength of their Legislative Assemblies. Bigger States where
the strength of the Assemblies lies between 200 and 400 could be placed in one group such
as Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Maharashtra,
Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu. States where the strength of the Legislative
Assemblies is between 80 and 200 such as Jammu & Kashmir, Punjab, Haryana, Assam,
Jharkhand, Orissa, Chhattisgarh, and Kerala could be grouped together. The third Group
may consist of States where the strength of their Assembly is below 80 such as Himachal
Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, Manipur, Mizoram,
Tripura, Meghalaya, and Goa. (For The Union Territory of Delhi, .Article 239AA(4) of
the Constitution itself limits the size of the Council of Ministers to 7 whereas in the case
ofPuducherry it is limited to 6).
While suggesting reduction in the size of the Council of Ministers, the Commission is
conscious of the fact that medium and smaller States should not be at a disadvantageous
situation and they must have adequate number of Ministers to meet the requirements of
governance. Therefore, it is of the view that a graded system could be adopted where the
maximum percentage limit could be in the range of 10-15 % of the strength of the respective

State and District Administration
State Legislative Assembly. To be more specific the larger States where membership of the
Assembly is more than 200, the strength of the Council of Minister should not exceed
100/0 of such strength. This maximum percentage could be 120/0 in case of medium States
(where the strength of the Assembly is between 80 and 200) and 150/0 in case of smaller
States (where the strength of the Assembly is below 80). This stipulation should however
be subject to an appropriate proviso to remove the resultant anomalies. It may be ensured
that the maximum number of the Ministers permissible for the medium sized States should
not exceed the number prescribed for a large State having 200 legislators and similarly
the maximum number of Ministers permissible for the smaller States may not exceed the
number prescribed for a medium sized State having 80 Legislators. At the same time there
may be no prescribed minimum.
The issue seems to be complex and there is a need to arrive at a national consensus through
deliberations/ discussions with the States. The Commission is of the view that the appropriate
forum for these deliberations/discussions would be the Inter-State Council.
Rationalising the number ofS ecretariat Departments
The Commission believes that there is need to emphasis that the allocation of work to
different departments should be made on the basis of an empirical analysis of the functions
and tasks to be performed by the government. There has to be a rational grouping of
subjects among departments keeping in mind considerations of efficiency, effectiveness,
homogeneity and economy.
Ideally, each of the Secretariat departments should deal with a particular segment of
. administrative activities which are inter-related and are more or less homogenous. It should
also provide an in-built mechanism for coordination of policies and programmes. The basis
for this rationalization could be as follows:-
a) Inter-related subjects, activities and functions to be placed under one
departmen t.
b) Need for synergy between the activities of various Departments.
c) Devolution of a large number of functions to the PRIs/ULBs.
d) The role of Secretaries to be redefined; to be divested of non-essential
responsibilities and executive work and larger delegation of power to the
executive departments/agencies.
e) Need for streamlining the decision making process.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
The Commission is of the view that a small and compact Secretariat in which all related
activities and functions are kept together in one department with more responsibilities
devolved on local governments and executive work (not related to policy making and broader
monitoring), hived off to executive agencies, is a sine qua-non for good governance at any
level of public administration. Hence, there is need to rationalize the number of Secretariat
Departments in the State Governments.
Separate focus on Policy Making and Implementation
There are two broad tasks of the government. The first is formulating policy in pursuance
of objectives that the political leadership specifies, and the second, implementation of that
policy. In a democracy, it is the political leadership-assisted by the Civil servants - who set the
vision, goals and strategic directions. But sound institutional arrangements play an important
role in translating the vision, goals and strategic directions into effective action.
The Commission has considered how a degree of separation between the policy making
and implementation functions of the Ministries and other government agencies can be
best achieved. Under the existing scheme, it is the Minister who lays down the extent of
delegation ofv arious functions to different levels within the Ministry as well as to its attached
and subordinate offices. In order to enable the Ministries to effectively fulfill their policy
making role and also to ensure uniformity across Ministries, the Commission is of the view
that some general principles to govern the extent of delegation may be incorporated in the
. Transaction of Business Rules. These principles may stipulate that the Ministries should
concentrate on the following:
• Policy making and strategic decisions.
• Budgeting
• Monitoring of implementation
• Appointments of key personnel
• Coordination
• Evaluation
Attached and subordinate offices would serve as the executive agencies of the Ministries
and concentrate on the implementation of government policies and programmes.

State and District Administration
Executive Agencies:
Separation of policy and implementation would also call for changes in how the policy
implementing agencies are structured. Implementational bodies need to be restructured by
giving them greater operational autonomy and flexibility, at the same time, making them
responsible and accountable for what they do.
In the States, a major part of implementation work is done by executive agencies of
different kinds. They are structured as departments, statutory boards, commissions,
departmental undertakings, societies and other parastatals. In effect, however, because of
centralized controls and inadequate delegation of authority, these bodies do not function
as real autonomous agencies. While the importance of delegating increased powers to the
executive agencies is now getting recognized and some States have delegated more powers
to the agencies, the overall approach has been one of caution and hesitancy. Delegations
are also often made in a piecemeal manner and with reservations. The Commission would,
therefore, like to emphasise that mere creation of Executive Agencies is not an end in itself
It is necessary to ensure that they have a right balance between autonomy and accountability
in their functioning. This could be achieved through well designed performance agreements,
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU), contracts, etc. However, preparing and enforcing
such performance contracts requires considerable upgradation of capacity in the concerned
government departments.
The Commission has comprehensively examined this issue in the context of the Union
Government in its Report on the "Organizational Structure of India" . The recommendations
made therein would also be applicable to the State Governments.
There may be some Executive Agencies in the States whose major functions/activities
have devolved on local governments. Their role will change. Instead of spending time on
personnel matters and micro-management, their role has to change to one of monitoring and
supervision, ensuring of standards and quality, guidance to local governments on technical
matters, training of personnel and giving feed back to the government on implementation
and performance and advising on changes that are needed in plans and programmes. It
follows that, in course of time, their number and size, as well as the skills of those manning
them will have to be different.
Internal restructuring oft he State Secretariat
Apart from the above, there are some important procedural issues related to the functioning of
the Secretariat in the States which too need to be reformed. They are internal reorganization

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
process re-engineering, simplication of government processes and recasting the manual
of office procedures. The Commission has examined these issues in detail in its Report
on "Organisational Structure of Government of India" with reference to functioning of
the Central Secretariat and has suggested a large number of measures to make the system
efficient, responsive and citizen friendly such as
a. Each Department should lay down a detailed scheme of delegation at all levels
so that the decision making takes place at the most appropriate level. It should
be laid down in the Manual of Office Procedure that every Ministry should
prescribe a detailed scheme of delegation for its officers. This delegation should .
be arrived at on the basis of an analysis of the activities and functions of the
Ministry/Department and the type of decisions that these entail which should
be dovetailed with the decision making units identified it that Department.
b. The scheme of delegation should be updated periodically and should also
be 'audited' at regular intervals. The audit should ensure that the delegated
authority is actually authorized by the delegate. The scheme of delegation
should be placed in the public domain.
c. The number oflevels through which a file should pass for a decision should not
exceed three. Only in cases where the Minister's approval is required, would
the file be initiated by the Deputy Secretary/Director concerned and be moved
through the Joint Secretary (or Additional Secretary/Special Secretary) and the
Secretary (or Special Secretary) to the Minister. Cases requiring approval of
Secretary should go through just two levels (e.g. US and Director, US and JS
or Director andJS). Cases requiring approval ofJS/DirectoriDS should come
through just one level. The exact combination of levels should be spelt out in
the scheme of delegation for each Ministry/Department whereas the number
of levels as suggested above should be prescribed in the Manual of Office
Procedure. The department dealing with administrative reforms in the Union
Government should be entrusted with the task of ensuring compliance with
this stipulation.
d. For addressing cross cutting issues, the Secretary of the concerned Department
should have the flexibility to create inter-displinary team.
e. Departments should build an electronic database of decisions that are likely
to be used as precedents. Thereafter such database should be periodically
reviewed and where necessary, changes in rules introduced in order to codify

State and District Administration
them. There may also be precedents that may be the result ofw rong or arbitrary
decision making which the Department would prefer not to rely on for the
future. In such cases the Department would have to appropriately change its
policy/guidelines and if required even the rules to ensure that these precedents
are not wrongly used.
The above recommendations will also need to be appropriately replicated in the State
Secretariats too.
REFURBISHING STATE CML SERVICES
Civil Services Law
In its Report on "Refurbishing Personnel Administration" (Tenth Report), the Commission
has recommended a series of measures for reforming the civil services of the Union
Government. The recommendations concern:
a) Determining a set of values for civil servants
b) Redefining the relationship between the government and the civil servants
c) Reforming procedures of recruitment to the civil services
d) Reforming the procedure for placement of officers and ensuring security of
their tenure - setting up an institutional mechanism
e) Drafting fresh terms and conditions for new appointees
f) Improving accountability mechanisms and simplifying disciplinary
proceedings
g) Creating new organisational structures in the government.
In order to provide legislative backing to these measures, the Commission has recommended
enactment of a Civil Services Law which will cover all personnel holding civil posts under
the Union. The proposed law has the following salient features:
I Civil Service Values
II Code of Ethics
III Recruitment and Conditions of Service

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
IV New Conditions of Appointment
V Fixation of Tenures
VI Dismissal, Removal etc. of Civil Servants
VII A performance management system should be mandatory for every organization
in the government.
VIII Constitution of the Central Civil Services Authority:
IX Functions of the Central Civil Services Authority:
X. Creation of Executive Agencies in Government:
Each one of the above mentioned features of the proposed law has been separately discussed
by the Commission in its tenth Report and suitable recommendations have been made.
These recommendations are equally relevant to the State administrative structure. In fact,
the Commission specifically recommended creation of State Civil Services Authority on
the lines of the Central Civil Services Authority. The Commission reiterates that each State
Government needs to enact a similar Civil Services Law in order to provide appropriate
legislative backing to the reform measures in respect of all personnel holding civil posts
in the State. However, the Commission is also of the view that it is advisable to achieve a
national consensus on this issue and have some kind of uniformity among different States
on enactment of this Law. This issue may be taken up for deliberations / discussions among
States at an appropriate forum such as the Inter-State Council, before the law is enacted
by each State.
Appointment and security oft enure at the senior levels in the State Government
The Commission has examined the issue of security of tenure and a transparent and objective
appointments process in its Reports on "Public Order" and "Personnel Management".
For the appointment of Director General of Police, the Commission has recommended
that the State Police Performance and Accountability Commission comprising inter alia
the Home Minister as the Chairman and Leader of the Opposition in the State Assembly,
Chief Secretary and others as its Members would recommend a panel of names to the
State Government for appointment. The tenure for the Director General of Police and the
Chief of the Crime Investigation Agency would be for at least three years and in case of

State and District Administration
their removal the State Government would need to seek the clearance of the State Police
Performance and Accountability Commission or the State Investigation Board, as the case
may be.
For appointments to the posts of the Chief Secretary and the Principal Conservator of Forest,
the Commission communicated the following interim suggestions to the Government in
December 2007:-
i) There should be a collegium to recommend a panel of names to the Chief
Minister/ Cabinet for these two posts. For the post of Chief Secretary, this
collegiums may consist of (a) a Minister nominated by the Chief Minister,
(b) the Leader of the Opposition in the State Legislative Assembly and (c) the
incumbent Chief Secretary. For the selection to the post of Principal Chief
Conservator of Forests the collegiums may consist of (a) The Minister In-charge
of Forests, (b) the leader of Opposition in the State Legislative Assembly and
(c) the Chief Secretary.
ii) There should be a fixed tenure of two years for both these posts.
iii) The selection for the post of Chief Secretary and Principal Chief Conservator
of Forests should be widened to include all officers above a specified seniority
(e.g. 30 years). All officers with seniority higher than a prescribed limit should
be eligible to be a part of the panel.
Subsequently, in its Report on "Refurbishing of Personnel Administration" (the Tenth
Report), the Commission suggested a detailed procedure for placement of officers at the
middle and top management levels in the Union Government. It calls for the constitution
of a Central Civil Service Authority by law, which will be an independent five member
body consisting of persons of eminence in public life and professionals with acknowledged
contributions to Society. This Authority will be empowered to deal with a large number of
issu~s concerning civil services such as assignment of domain to officers, preparing panels for
posting at the levels ofJ oint Secretary and above, fixing tenures for senior assignments and
such other matters that may be referred to it by the Union Government. The Commission is
of the view that there should be a similar Civil Services law and a State Civil Services Authority
for each State. The mandate and functions of the State Body would largely coincide with
those prescribed under the Union Civil Services Law. However, till the time the proposed
law is enacted and the State Civil Service Authority is constituted, recommendations made
above may be immediately adopted by all the State Governments.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Regional level Administration:
Iheoretically, regional positions serve two purposes:-
(a) A regional officer supervises the functioning of departmental officers posted in
the districts (usually 4-5 in a division) and then he sends a consolidated report
for this entire area to the State Government.
(b) Existence of these senior positions opens up promotional avenues for the
departmental officers and hence serves an important purpose in cadre
managemen t.
In the post 73rd/74th Constitutional Amendment scenario, the situation is different. The
district has now been recognized by the Constitution as the third tier of government with
local institutions, both rural and urban, vested with substantial functions and powers with
respect to the matters listed in the 11 th and 12th Schedule. In the transferred domain, the
machinery of the State Government including the District Collector and his offices, have
a limited role. The Commission has dealt with these facets of district administration in its
report on "Local Governance" (sixth Report). As recommended therein, all the development
functions pertaining to the subjects listed under the Eleventh/Twelfth Schedule of the
Constitution have to be dealt by a District Council consisting of representatives from both
urban and rural areas. The District Collector would now be the ex officio Chief Officer
of this body and would have a dual responsibility. He will be accountable to the District
Council in respect of transferred matters, but will report to the State Government on
regulatory/ other matters which do not stand delegated to the District Council. Also the
offices of the line departments of the State Governments working at the District and Sub
District levels pertaining to these subjects would be merged with the District Council and
the appropriate Local Government Institutions.
In the last few decades, most of the State Governments have carried out large scale
reorganization of the districts; geographically the districts have become compact and smaller.
There have been rapid advances in technology leading to tremendous improvement in
connectivity and accessibility (both physical as well as electrortic). Hence, the Commission
feels that there is no need to have any intermediate level of administration in the form of
regional/divisional offices between the two units of Government - District and the State.
Having such a layer in between the two tiers adds only to red-tapism and delays.
With regard to issues of promotions and cadre management, (which may get disturbed if
the regional offices are wound up), the Commission feels that this problem can be taken

State and District Administration
care of by identifying suitable departmental posts in the major Districts and at the State
Headquarters to be manned by the senior officers who are presently eligible to head the
regional offices.
Lokayukta and the Vigilance setup
Currently, all the States have an Office of the Vigilance Commissioner which is usually
headed by a senior IAS / IPS officer. There is also a Vigilance Bureau which is the investigating
arm of the vigilance setup. The State Government consists of a large number of departments
whose work is highly specialized and of technical nature. In order to obtain a composite
view on various vigilance issues, it is desirable for the Government to have requisite technical
expertise in the office of the Vigilance Commissioner. As such, the Commission is of the
view that the organization of the Vigilance Commissioner in the State should be structured
on the pattern of the Union CVC; particularly in the larger States. The State Vigilance
Commission should be a three Member Body with Members who have been experts in
their respective fields. In smaller States, however, the requirement of a multi Member Body
may not be there.
As regards the Lokayukta, the Commission's views have been summarized in Para 2.8.4.1
of the Commission's Report on Ethics in Governance.
The Commission believes that in order to raise the overall quality and effectiveness of
government functioning, capacity enhancement of government personnel is an issue of
critical importance. The Commission has examined it in detail in its Report on "Refurbishing
of Personnel Administration" (Tenth Report).
While generally reiterating and re-emphasizing these recommendations, the Commission is
of the view that every State should formulate a comprehensive human resource development
policy with training as its main constituent. While doing so the broad parameters of the
National Training Policy, 1996 may be kept in mind. Such a policy should address the issues
raised in the preceding paragraphs. Simultaneously, a suitable monitoring mechanism to
supervise the implementation of such policy may also be set up.
The Commission feels that there is need to somewhat disperse the existing unitary
institutional arrangement and set-up adequately equipped training centres at the regional and
the district levels (their number will depend on the specific requirement of the State). The
Apex Institute should concentrate on all aspects of training of Class I and Class II officers,
(both pre-induction as well as mid-career programmes). The Regional Institutes could look
after the shorter training needs of the Class II officers and also run foundation courses for

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Class III recruits. It would also be desirable to have district level training organizations which
could take care of the mid-career training needs of Class III employees. The district centre
should also have proper facilities for skill! behavioral training of Class IV employees.
The Commission is further of the view that the State level apex training institute (the
ATI) should be truly professional and autonomous and have an overall integrative and
coordinating role for the entire training/orientation activity running in the State. It should
act as the primary resource centre for level II and level III Training Institutes. It would also
provide training to those who will work as trainers at the Regional and District Institutes. In
course of time, it can undertake projects of distance learning and become a virtual academy
of training for the entire State.
The State Administrative Training Institutes should have embedded in them Centers dealing
with Good Governance and documentation and institutionalization of good practices - so
that these are institutionalized and disseminated across States.
STATE PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION
In recent years this Constitutional body has suffered extensive loss of reputation in some
States, mainly on account of (a) charges of corruption, favoritism and nepotism in matters
of recruitment and (b) use of archaic processes and procedures in its functioning which
leads to inordinate delays.
The following issues need to be examined in this context:-
i. Appointment of Chairman and Members - issue of qualification
ii. Role and functions of the Public Service Commission
iii. Its composition / strength
Appointment of Chairman / Members
The Commission is of the view that the intention behind creation of an autonomous Public
Service Commission as a Constitutional authority was to create a body of achievers and
ex-administrators who could select meritorious candidates for recruitment and promotion
to various.c ivil service positions under the State Government with utmost probity and
transparency. There is need to take steps to ensure that only persons of high standing,
intellectual ability and reputation are selected as Chairman and Members of the Public
Service Commission.

State and District Administration
Strength oft he Public Service Commissions
The Constitution does not prescribe any limit on the strength of the Public Service
Commission. By tradition, the size of this body in the States has remained small. The Union
Public Service Commission had a slightly larger strength.
The Commission is of the view that both (a) the matter of appointment of Chairman/
Members and their qualifications and (b) the matter of prescribing a limit for the strength
of the Commission, are complex issues. There is need to evolve a national consensus on these
two issues among the States through discussions/deliberations at the Inter-State Council.
Functions of the Public Service Commission; its relationship with the junior recruiting
bodies
Currently a large chunk of employees in the State Government belong to Group 'C' (Class
III) and Group 'D' (Class IV) categories. The Commission feels that the domain of the State
Public Service Commission should be (a) recruitment of candidates for higher level posts
(class I and Class II posts of various States Services) and (b) advising the government in
senior level promotions through the Departmental Promotion Committee. The Commission
should also handle recruitment / promotion to teaching posts in government Colleges and
other fully funded units of the Universities. As regards recruitment of junior functionaries,
the role of the State Public Service Commission would be to lay down the principles, norms
and standards which need to be followed. The State Commission would act as a watch
dog organization for public recruiting agencies like the Subordinate Service Commissions,
Teachers Selection Commissions, District Recruitment Boards etc.
Such a reform, while ensuring adoption of public policies like those on reservations, would
speed up recruitments, lead to adoption of common norms and procedures ensuring
objectivity and encourage local aspirants for district and local level posts.
DISTRICT ADMINISTRATION
Introduction
The Commission had examined the issue of whether there is any need to retain the office
of the District Collector in its present form in its Report on Local Governance. There is a
view that with the empowerment of PRIs/ULBs in the districts, there is need to devise an
environment in which the institution of District Collector gradually loses importance and
ultimately recedes into a district levelland revenue functionary, responsible to the local
bodies. This view is based on the belief that the strong traditions linked with this institution

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
and its recognition in the public mind as the prime mover of governance at the district
level would tend to impede growth of any other authority at that level.
The counter view is that the office of the District Collector has risen to this level of importance
and utility through many national and local crises and it should not be weakened.
The Commission has expressed its view in its Report on Local Governance that a representative
District Government should be empowered while fully utilizing the institutional strength
of the District Collectors.
Redefining the Collector's Role
A Wide Mandate
At present the portfolio of the Collector's office generally includes the following functions
and activities (though there may be variations across the States):-
• acting as Head of Land and Revenue Administration, including responsibility for
District Finance (expenditure and audit);
• acting as the District Head of the Executive Magistracy and overall supervision
of law and order and security and some say in police matters;
• as Licensing and Regulatory Authority in respect of the various special laws such
as Arms and Cinematography Acts etc. in the District;
• conduct of elections - for Parliament, State Legislature and Local Bodies;
• as the Officer-in-charge of Disaster Management;
• as the guardian of public lands with the responsibility to prevent and remove
encroachments which is often a source of tension between vested interests and
the district administration;
• public service delivery, either by facilitating or directly delivering services assigned
to the district administration from other departments. (In this respect, the
Collector often acts as Chairman of the Board for Parastatals, or as Chairman or
Member of various standing and inter-departmental committees);
• facilitation of interaction between civil society and the State Government;
• Handling issues oflocal cadre management such as recruitment, in-service training
and promotion etc; and

State and District Administration
• as the Chief Information and Grievance Redressal Officer of the District.
As per the findings of a study report prepared by the CGG, Hyderabad for the Department
of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances, Government of India, a Deputy
Commissioner in Assam is the Chairman of 43 district level committees. In its interactions
with some of the Collectors, the Commission noted that many of them were not fully aware
of how many committees they are required to preside over.
Besides, there may be other important organizations functioning in the district such as
the Red Cross Society, a Degree College or Sports Associations which may be also headed
by the Collector. Often, the Collector is appointed as the Chairman of a Committee to
manage a major trust/endowment located in the district.
Such widespread functions without well defined roles result in lack of clarity and diffusion
of the Collector's responsibilities. Also, after the establishment of PRIs / ULBs as the third
tier of government, there is no need to assign any role/function to the Collector in respect
of activities which are transferred by the State Government to these bodies. As such, the
Commission is of the view that there is need to redefine the role and responsibilities of
the Collector in a clear manner. His job profile should consist of (a) a well defined set bf
exclusive activities both statutory as. well as non-statutory as a functionary of the State
i
Government (b) the general work of coordination with various departments agencies of
the State and the Union Governments at the district level and (c) in the interim period
till the time the local elected Institutions mature into District Government - as the Chief
Executive Officer of the proposed District Council.
The main functions of the Collector may now include:
(i) Land and Revenue administration, land acquisition, custodian of government
lands and properties, registration, recovery of public demand
(ii) Executive magistracy and maintenance of Law and Order, Internal Security,
Prisons, Remand/ Juvenile Homes
(iii) Licensing and regulatory functions with respect to various special laws pertaining
to Arms, Explosives, Cinemas etc.
(iv) Disaster Management
(v) Civil supplies, public distribution and social welfare
(vi) Excise )

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
(vii) Transport
(viii) Mining
(ix) Labour Laws
(x) Elections
(xi) Legal Affairs
(xii) Census
(xiii) Protocol, general administration,
(xiv) Treasury management / district accounts office related work
(xv) Public Relations Department, NIC and other miscellaneous functions assigned
by the State Government, coordination with civil society
(xvi) Coordination with line departments / other agencies of the State and Union
Governments
(xvii) In the interim period - till the local institutions obtain adequate maturity - as
Chief Officer of the proposed District Government
Land and Revenue Administration
The system of land records management varies from State to State depending upon their
historical evolution and local traditions. Several departments are involved in managing land
records in most of the States, and the citizen has to approach more than one agency for
complete land records, e.g. Revenue Department for textual records and mutations; Survey
& Settlement (or Consolidation) Department for the maps; Registration Department for
verification of encumbrances and registration of transfer, mortgage, etc; the Panchayats
(in some States) for mutation, and the municipal authorities for urban land records. These
departments work in a stand-alone manner, and updating of records by anyone of them
makes the records of the others outdated. Thus, the records are usually outdated and do
not reflect the ground realities. Also, there is no integration of textual and spatial records,
making it difficult to give maps-to-scale with the Records of Rights (RoRs). Further, the
most important activity for updating the records, i.e., survey has been neglected in most
of the States. Original survey for cadastral mapping has not taken place in many parts of
the country.

State and District Administration
The Commission in its Eleventh Report has made the following recommendations:
Recommendations
a. Surveys and measurements need to be carried out in a mission mode
utilizing modern technology to arrive at a correct picture of land holdings
and land parcels and rectification of outdated maps.
b. This needs to be accompanied by an analysis of the existing mechanism for
updating land records - which varies from State to Tate - to be supplanted
by an improved and strengthened mechanism which ensures that all future
transactions in tides are immediately reflected in the land records. Such
a system should be able to detect changes in tides through various means
- namely, succession, will, partition, gift, survivorship etc. and update
records accordingly.
c. The dispute resolution mechanism with regard to land tides needs to be
strengthened in order to be compatible with the demands made on it.
d. In case of urban areas, a similar exercise needs to be undertaken especially
since measurements and surveys have not been done in many of such areas
and even record of tides is not available in most cities.
The Commission would like to reiterate these recommendations. The Commission would
also like to emphasise that the tasks mentioned above should be one of the primary duties
of the District Collector.
Coordination with line departments/other agencies of the State/Union Government
Coordination among various departments of the State Governments is one of the major
activities of the District Collector. Most of the State Governments give due regard to the
views of the Collector whenever there is need for inter-departmental interaction at the field
level. Even other agencies look to him for guidance and support for effective implementation
of their programmes and activities.
As Chief Officer oft he proposed District Government
As per ,recommendations made earlier, each district would ultimately need to have a District
Council comprising of representatives of both rural and urban bodies. The District Collector
would function as the Chief Officer of this Council. The District Collector-cum-Chief

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Officer would have dual responsibility and would be fully accountable to the elected District
Government on all local matters, and to the State Government on all regulatory matters
not delegated to the District Government.
The Commission believes that the functions described in the above categories are of critical
importance to the effective functioning of the government at the field level and the workload
involved in the domain of these activities demands considerable time and attention of
the District Collector and his direct subordinates. The State Government should ensure
that the responsibility of the District Collector is neither diluted nor diverted from these
activities.
Implementation ofR ight to Information Act at the district level
The Right to Information Act, 2005 is a landmark legislation which is increasingly being
viewed as an important tool for empowerment of the poor and the weak. Availability
of information to the general public and clarity about functioning of governmental
institutions are essential components of good governance. This Act promotes transparency,
accountability, predictability and participation. A whole set ofinstitutions has been created
at the national as well as at the state level to ensure that organizations of the government
comply with the provisions of the Act and enhance citizen centricity in governance. It
is now more than three years since the law was enacted. There is a common perception '
i
that the impact of this legislation has not percolated in a significant way beyond the State
capital. The Commission feels that the functioning of the lower level officials of the State
and District Administration should be much more responsive and proactive to the needs
and concerns of the citizen. There is need to strengthen the compliance machinery at the
district level to enforce provisions of the RTI Act and to reduce the element of delay and
subjectivity in the functioning of the lower level formations of the government. This could
be done by creating a special RTI Cell in the office of the Collector, whose functions could
be reviewed by the Collector himself at regular periodicity.
Experienced Officers as District Collectors
Currently in many States, lAS officers are posted as Collectors/District Magistrates soon
after they get their senior scale i.e., on completion of about 4 years of service. Since the
duration of the institutional training for All India Service officers itself is of two years, his
entire repertoire of public administration consists of two years of work either in the field
as Sub Divisional Magistrate or as an Under Secretary in the State Secretariat, when he, is
catapulted to this post of immense responsibility.

State and District Administration
A Collector/District Magistrate functions as the representative of the government at the
district level and coordinates the activities of officers of other departments of the State
Government, many of whom would have put in significantly larger number of years in the
government service. Increased political consciousness, high expectations of the public and
the complex requirements of the modern day administration demand that officers should
have, apart from ability, experience both in the field and Secretariat and the maturity
to work in this important assignment. In other words the experience of officers posted
should be commensurate with the problems and complexities of the district and to that
extent there is a strong case for posting officers of sufficient seniority as Collector/District
Magistrate particularly in districts with large populations and a history of administrative
complexities.
The Commission is, therefore, of the view that while officers could usually, be posted as
CollectorslDistrict Magistrates in their early career, in complex and problem-prone districts,
an lAS officer should be posted as Collector/District Magistrate only on completion of
10-12 years of service.
Modernizing the Office oft he District Collector
Some important steps that could help this process are:
• Management Information Systems I IT tools IE-Governance
• Grievance & Public Feedback Cell
• A Vigilance Cell
Tours inspection notes and institutional memory
• Civil Society & Media Cell
Process Re-engineering and use ofI nformation Technology
Most of the issues having a bearing on the effective and efficient district administration like
security of tenure, transparent transfer posting policy, performance management, outcome
evaluation, effective citizen centric administration, use of information technology, process
re-engineering etc have been extensively dealt by the Commission in its previous Reports.
Reports on Refurbishing Personnel Administration, Ethics in Governance, Citizen Centric
Administration and e-Governance are particularly relevant in this regard. The issue of
capacity building, training and human resource management has been dealt separately in

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
this Report in the chapter on Personnel Management which also covers the steps required
to be taken in this regard at the district level.
Documenting best practices/innovations
In many States and districts, officers have taken initiatives which have considerably
improved performance of government programmes in the district. Be it the social audit of
NREGA, simplifying procedures for registration of property or issuing various Certificates,
Officers have shown ingenuity and innovativeness. Such initiatives have resulted in better
implementational practices and improvement in the overall tenor of governance at the
field level. With appropriate modifications, it is possible to replicate these innovations and
practices in other areas too. However, many of these ideas and initiatives are forgotten when
the officer is transferred out of his assignment. The Commission feels that there is need to
document such innovations and institutionalise such practices.
Functional and Structural Reforms
The Commission made comprehensive recommendations on issues like creation of District
Councils, position of parastatals, centrality ofPRIs in the implementation of the Centrally
Sponsored Schemes, role of Panchayats in service delivery and in important sectors such
as education, health, water supply and sanitation etc; personnel management capacity
building in local institutions, accountability and transparency, modernisation and use of
technology in local bodies etc. in its Report on Local Governance.
The Commission reiterates that these recommendations should be implemented in both
letter and spirit.
Implementation of the above recommendations would mean complete restructuring of the
existing format of the Collector's office and line departments of the State Governments.
While doing so the following aspects need to be kept in mind:
• The need to conform to the Constitutional mandate envisaged for urban and
rural local bodies under the 73rd and 74th Amendment and deepen democratic
and administrative decentralization
• Clarity in functional allocation & subjects and mapping them to specific
institutions
• Streaming multiple accountability lines that exist within & across the Collector's
office, line departments, other parastalals/agencies and local bodies

State and District Administration
• Need for coordination between various structures & convergence in service delivery
functions
In the light the above considerations, the Commission again reiterates that there is need to
restructure the entire administrative machinery at the district level in the following way:
- There should be an integrated command at the district level in the form of the
District Council.
- The District Collector would have a dual responsibility in the new set up:
o As the Chief Officer of the District Council fully accountable to it on all local
matters.
o As the Representative of the State, it would be reporting to the State
Government on all regulatory matters not delegated to district government
(District Council).
Till the time, the institution of the District Council as envisaged by the Commission is given
shape, Zilla Parishad will continue to remain the most important unit of self-government
at the district level.
Line Departments oft he State Government at the District / Sub-District level
The role ofline department and its Head of the Departments (HOD) and their relationship
with the proposed District Council would also need to be clarified. The role of the line
departments in supporting the District Council will have to be clearly spelt out. While the
District Council and local government institutions at the sub-district level are given clearcut
roles in planning and implementation of development schemes, the line departments may
be in a position to provide valuable technical support in this process. Briefly stated, what
is envisaged is that the District Council shall be responsible for administrative approval
and implementation in respect of all matters coming within its purview with the technical
support and guidance of the concerned technical department of the government. In this
scheme of things, the Agency Heads of the line departments will have to devote more
attention to technical aspects of their work than they are able to do at present, burdened
as they are with an enormous volume of administrative work, including work on personnel
matters. Each Head of the Department will function as a nodal technical agency advising
government on the one hand and monitoring and guiding the work of the District Councils
on the other. He will have to assess the trends ,as they emerge and advise on policies, measures
and programmes in time, to counteract negative aspects and encourage the positive ones.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
He will have to appraise and evaluate the projects and programmes proposed for technical
approval as well. Adequate time and attention will need to be devoted to training and
orientation programmes for constant upgradation of the skills of the technical personnel
of the departments.
ADMINISTRATION OF THE UNION TERRITORIES
The National Capital Territory of Delhi
Delhi, due to historical reasons and being the National capital has a unique and complex
governance structure, conditioned primarily by the fact that there are two governments
functioning concurrently in the same city. It is a Union Territory but at the same time it
also has a Legislative Assembly consisting of elected members and an Executive consisting
of the Chief Minister and the Council of Ministers. As per provision of Article 239AA(3)
(a), the legislative powers of the Government of the NCT are restricted. It can legislate on
the subjects mentioned in the State List of the Seventh Schedule except those dealing with
public order, police and land and the related aspects of Entries at 64, 65 and 66.
This diarchy creates problems for effective governance of Delhi. They could be considered
under the following five headings
(1) Role of the Government of the NCT in Municipal Affairs; - its relationship
with the Municipal Corporation of Delhi
(2) Role of the Government of the NCT in spatial planning and land development;
- its relationship with the DDA
(3) Status of the NDMC
(4) Role of the Government of the NCT in public order, security and enforcement
of other laws
(5) NCR Planning Board
Role of the Government ofNCT in Municipal Affairs:-its relationship with the Municipal
Corporation of Delhi (M CD)
There are several provisions in the DMC Act which place this body under the control
and superintendence of the Union Government. Section 338A of the Act (General
superintendence, etc., of the Union Government), Section 54 (appointment of the
Commissioner), Section 347D (appeal to the LG against the orders of the appellate tribunal),

State and District Administration
Section 349A (power of the Central Government to make bye-laws) and Sections 485,
486, 487, 488, 489 & 490 (powers of the Union Government to require production of
documents are some of the important provisions which places this body under the domain
of the Union Government to carry out inspection to issue directions & enforce compliance
and power to dissolve the Corporation on default in performance of the duties. In all there
are 57 sections/sub-sections in the DMC Act through which the Union Government wields
power over this body.
There is growing realisation that once an eleCted legislature has been established for this
Territory, the Delhi Government should have full responsibility and powers with regard
to provision of municipal services in the area. Further reasons are (i) Municipal functions
come under entry 5 of the State List of the Seventh Schedule which is a transferred subject
(ii) a substantial part of the MCD funds comes from the plan budget of the GNCT of
Delhi (iii) the citizens of Delhi democratically elect legislators for the GNCT and the
principle of subsidiarity demands that municipal bodies should be linked to the nearest
tier of Government.
The contrary view is that the National Capital Region of Delhi is an entity distinct from
a full fledged State. It is primarily a Union Territory with slightly enlarged powers which
find expression through a democratically elected Assembly and a Council of Ministers.
Delhi being the seat of the Union Government, the final authority in respect of its overall
development, land use planning and development, allocation, provision of basic services,
public order, enforcement of other laws, crime control and security needs to vest in the
Union Government. The demand for development of the city as a model metropolis which
could take care of the interests of the entire Nation, institutions of National / International
importance, foreign establishments and provide top grade amenities to its citizens, also
dictates that the management of the city should remain with the Union Government.
The Municipal Corporation being the key urban service provider in the city should be
in a position to work in a wider perspective and hence needs to stay with the Union
Governmen t.
The Commission is of the view that since Delhi is the national capital with people from
all parts of the country being its residents, some responsibility for its orderly growth and
security must lie with the Union Government. At the same time, there is no reason to
burden the Union Government with matters of local import which are best addressed by
the elected government of the territory and the elected Municipal Corporation. In other
words, a balance has to be struck between the imperatives flowing from Delhi's status as
the national capital and as the seat of its own elected government. The existing balance is
heavily tilted towards the Union Government at the cost of the functional ability of the

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Government of the NCT. The Commission has sought to restore a more workable balance
on the principle of subsidiarity.
The Commission is of the view that a simple notification issued by the Union Government
under Section 490A will bring the MCD within the domain of the GNCT. In order that,
the Union Government retains some overarching role over delivery of municipal services
in the National Capital Territory, a few provisions of the existing Act will need to remain
as they are. For example, Sections 487 to 490 of Chapter XXIV will need to be retained
in their present form. Section 54 which deals with the appointment of Commissioner
will have to be suitably amended so that the Municipal Commissioner is appointed by
the GNCT in consultation with the Union Government. Similarly, some provisions of
Chapter XVI dealing with building regulations will need to be kept in the domain of the
Union Government (for example Section 347). Section 503 (dealing with exemptions to
the diplomatic missions) and Section 508 (special provisions as to the Red Fort area) will
also need to lie with the Union Government. The Commission suggests that the Union
Government should appoint an Expert Committee which would work out the details of
the required legal changes in a time bound manner.
Empowerment oft he Mayor
The Commission is of the view that a longer tenure is one of the factors necessary for
empowerment of elected representatives. The tenure of the Mayor should be for 5 years;
co-terminous with the election cycle of the Corporation and subject to the condition that
he/she enjoys the confidence of the House. Hence, the Mayor of the MCD should be
elected once every five years.
The wider issue of empowerment of elected representatives in Urban / Rural Local Bodies
has already been discussed in detail by the Commission in its Report on Local Governance,
and it has held the view that the Mayor should be directly elected by popular mandate
through a citywide election.
The Commission feels that the above observations and recommendations are of considerable
relevance to the Delhi Municipal Corporation. Implementation of these recommendations
will strengthen the element of citizen-centricity in the municipal administration of the
city.
Issue ofs plitting up the MCD
The size of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi has been the subject of intense debate for
last many years. There is a strong view that a large single municipal body providing civic

State and District Administration
services to more than 157lakh people (2006) spread over an area of 1400 square kilometers
is simply unsustainable and urgent steps must be taken to tackle this issue.
The Commission is of the view that the municipal services in the NCT need to continue
under the jurisdiction of a single municipal body viz. the MCD. However, to make its
functioning more efficient, responsive and citizen friendly, it should be re-structured into
an effective three tier institution i.e. the apex institution, the corporation, the zones and
wards. There is need to adequately strengthen and empower the middle tier - Zones/Janpads.
The Commission suggests that the zones should be given maximum possible financial and
administrative autonomy. Each zone should have a separate fund and all the taxes collected
under Sections 113(1) and (2) of the DMC Act should be collected and retained by the
zones. Their powers with regard to enforcement of regulations and bye-laws should be
enhanced appropriately. These Janpad Parish ads will be democratic institutions.
(a) They will need to be politically linked with the "umbrella" corporation
(b) The role and area of their operation must be clearly demarcated
(c) They should have autonomy in their area of operation
(d) They must have adequate powers to fulfill their role
(e) Their relationship with the apex body - "the corporation" must be clearly
defined and the roles to be performed by each clearly spelt out
(f) Officers must have freedom and autonomy to fulfill their roles without day to
day interference of the elected functionaries who are subjected to constituency
pressures, still should be within the control of the elected people
Each Zone/Janpad will have a Zonal CouncillJanpad Parishad, with all the Councillors
elected from Wards that comprise the Janpad as members. The MLAs and the MPs whose
constituencies or a substantial part of it fall within the area of the Janpad will also be
members. All these elected persons will have equal voting rights. Every Zonal Council/Janpad
Parishad will elect a Chairman and a Deputy Chairman from amongst the Councillors. The
Zone/Janpad will also have other members without voting rights and these can include the
Deputy Commissioners both of revenue and police and 2 or 3 reputed persons in the Zone/
Janpad area. Matters concerning their appointment, qualifications etc. can be prescribed
by Regulations to be framed by the Nagar Nigam. In all other matters, except for matters
that are discussed in the next chapter, their composition, functioning and powers will be

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
analogous to that of the MCD under the present DMC Act, 1957 including the framing
of a separate budget.
The third tier would consist of the Ward Sabhas. The M CD will be the apex level which
will not delve into day-to-day functioning of the zones. It will act as a kind of a holding
entity, responsible for giving overall policy directions, high level conceptual, technical
and HRD support to the Zones, whenever necessary. It will provide coordination among
Zones and make laws / bye-laws for the whole of Delhi and also take up projects which
run across multiple zones. It will be the duty of this apex body to ensure that standards of
development & civic amenities remain uniform throughout the city.
Distinction between Urban and Rural areas in the NCT
The Commission is of the view that the traditional concept of "rural areas" which used to
be characterized by low levels of income obtained through agricultural activities, does I10t
hold good for Delhi. The land prices around NCT have shot up in geometric progression
during the last few decades and it has brought unexpected prosperity even to small and
marginal farmers living in the "rural areas" of the NCT. In this context, the Commission
feels that there is no need to maintain this artificial distinction between "urban" and "rural
areas" and the entire geographical area falling within the NCT should be declared as "urban"
under the meaning of Section 2(61) of the DMC Act. The Municipal Corporation should
realise taxes, levies and other charges accordingly from the residents of these areas.
. New Delhi Municipal Council
In view of the fact that the Union Government owns 80 per cent of the land and buildings
in the NDMC area, many ofw hich are important Union Government offices and residences
as well as a concentration of foreign diplomatic missions it would be appropriate that the
present structure ofNDMC is not disturbed.
Delhi Cantonment Board
Set up under the Cantonment Act 1924, the Delhi Cantonment Board consists of a
Chairman, 7 elected and 7 official members. The Cantonment Board is empowered to
exercise powers and perform civic functions such as provision of water supply, electricity,
education, health etc. within its jurisdiction spread over an area of approximately 43
sq.kms. The responsibility for delivery of basic municipal services such as roads, drainage,
sewerage, street lights, etc. within its area is with the Cantonment Board. The Board is also
empowered to levy and collect various local taxes such as house tax, water tax, advertisement
tax, profession tax, etc. in order to raise their own resources. Though, the overall control

State and District Administration
of the Cantonment area lies with the Union Government, some coordination between
the Board and the Delhi Government is necessary. However, since it covers primarily the
military area, the Commission does not wish to go further into this matter and propose
any changes in its structure etc.
Role of the Government ofNCT in spatial planning and Land Development; its relationship
with the Delhi Development Authority
The Delhi Development Authority was created by an Act of Parliament in 1957 in order to
promote and secure planned spatial development of Delhi. Major functions of the DDA
include formulation of the master plan for the city. It is authorized to acquire, hold, manage
and dispose ofland and other property, to carry out building, engineering, mining and other
operations, to execute works in connection with the supply of water and electricity, disposal
of sewage and other services and amenities. The Union Ministry of Urban Development is the
nodal ministry for the DDA. The mandate of the DDA is to acquire land for development
of new areas notified as 'development areas' and once it is developed, hand it over to the
relevant local authority with the DDA remaining as a lease administering authority. The
responsibility of the DDA also includes overall planning of traffic and transportation. In
the discharge of its functions, it has to coordinate with a large number of agencies, others
under the control of the Delhi Government like PWD, some under the Union Government
like the Ministry of Road Transport and also some with autonomous organisations such
as the Delhi Metro Rail Corporation. In 1974, 'construction of housing units' was added
to DDA's mandate.
There is a view that this organization should be brought under the management and control
of the Government of NCT. This demand is based on the argument that since there is an
elected legislature for the NCT, the effective control of land and land management should
lie with this legislature and not with the Central Government or its representative the Lt.
Governor.
In this context, it is relevant to note that though land is a subject under the State List of the
7th Schedule (Entry 18), under provisions of Article 239AA3(a), this subject has not been
transferred to the Delhi Legislature and is still being managed by the Union Government
through the Land and Development Office (Ministry of Urban Development) and the
DDA.
Except for sending three Members of the Delhi Legislative Assembly to the DDA Board,
the Delhi legislature has no control over its functioning. During interactions of the
Commission with the Chief Minister, and senior officials of the GNCT it was urged that
- I

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
since the issue of land management is closely linked with the other functions entrusted to
the Delhi Government it should have substantial control over this subject.
The Commission appreciates the complexities of the matter. The governance structure in
Delhi has gradually evolved over a considerable period and has led to the establishment of
a democratically elected government. Considering the importance of control over land in
the national capital city, the Commission feels that the time has not yet come when this
control could be completely handed over to the Delhi Government. At the same time, in
order to remove bottlenecks in the governance and coordination between various activities
. related to land management, the Delhi Government should have a substantial say in this
regard.
Section 3(3) of the DDAAct, 1957 indicates the composition of the Delhi Development
Authority:
"The authority shall consist oft he following members, namely:- (aJ Chairman who shall
be the Lieutenant Governor oft he National Capital Territory ofD elhi, ex officio; "
A simple replacement of the word "Lt. Governor" by the "Chief Minister of the NCT"
will serve the purpose.
At the same time, the Union Government's control over macro-planning of land and its
utilization needs to stay. The Union Government may continue to exercise its control by
giving prior approval to any Rules / Notifications required. to be framed under the relevant
Act. (Section 4 which deals with the power of the Union Government to appoint two
suitable persons as the Secretary and the Chief Accounts Officer, Section 9 dealing with
submission of plans to the Union Government for approval, Section 12 dealing with the
Union Government's power to declare any area as a development area for the purpose of this
Act, Section 15 and 21 dealing with acquisition / disposal of land, Section 22 dealing with
Nazulland, Section 26 dealing with annual report, Section 41,42, 52, 55 and 56 and 57
with regard to issues of control by the Union Government, returns and inspections, powers
to delegate, powers of modification, power to make rules and power to make regulations
etc and various other related sections which give powers to the Union Government / Lt.
Governor will remain as they are).
Apart from changes in the composition and structure of the DDA and the provision with
respect to control over its functioning, reform is also needed in the internal governance of
the DDA to make it a more efficient, responsive and corruption free organisation.

State and District Administration
With the restructuring of the DDA; constituting a Metropolitan PlaI?-ning Committee as
per Article 243ZE of the Constitution may not be necessary.
Role oft he Government oft he NCT:- In Police, Law and Order
The subject of Police and Law and Order, have' ~ot been devolved on the Delhi Go~ernment.
This is being administered by the Ministry of Home Affairs, Governine~t of Indifl
through the Lt. Governor of Delhi. The Delhi Government thus has no s'ay in'tbe'Police
Administration and maintenance of law and order within the capital city. ,":
In its Fifth Report (dealing with Public Order), the Commission recommended far
reaching reforms in the Police Administration. The Commission recommended separation
of crime investigation from other policing functions. Subsequently, it was observed that
the investigation agency would only be dealing with specified cases and a large number of
cases under the IPC as well as State and special laws would still come under the domain of
the law and order police. Interestingly, it was pointed out that out of the 50 lakh crimes
registered each year in the States and Union Territories, only one third of these were IPC
crimes and the rest were offences under various special and local laws. Accordingly, the
Commission recommended setting up a local police service in bigger cities with populations
of more than one million to deal with offences under municipal and local laws. As regards
special laws, the Commission recommended that their enforcement should be gradually
entrusted to the respective department e.g. State Excise, Forest, Transport, Food etc. For
management of traffic within the city limits, it was recommended that "the function of
traffic control (alongwith traffic police may be transferred to the local government in cities
having a population of more than a million)."
In addition, the Commission also recommended setting up of the Metropolitan Police
Authorities in all cities with a population above one million. This authority should have
powers to plan and oversee community policing, improve police citizen interface and
suggest ways to improve quality of policing etc. The authorities should have nominees of
the State Government, elected Municipal Councillors and non-partisan eminent persons to
be appointed by the Government as Members with an elected Member as the Chairperson.
This recommendation was also reiterated by the Commission in its sixth Report on Local
Governance.
The Commission feels that the above recommendations of the previous Reports need to
be implemented in all the States and UTs. However, a distinction is required to be made
in the case of Delhi due to its unique features. The Union Government may retain control
over the broader aspects of security and law and order whereas traffic, local policing and
1-

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission-A Summary
enforcement of the special laws could be handed over to the Delhi Government. This could
be done by bringing suitable amendments in the Delhi Police Act. In the long run some
of these activities could be transferred to the Municipal Corporations.
The Commission is of the view that powers of the Police with regard to traffic, local policing
and special laws (such as Delhi Entertainment Tax Act, Cinematography Act etc.) may
be handed over to the Delhi Government. As it will involve a major restructuring of the
present Delhi Police establishment, it may be advisable to constitute a Task Force with
representation from both the Union and the NCT Government to study the matter in
depth and suggest appropriate restructuring including the required legislative changes.
The Government oft he NCT;- Power to raise public debt
Keeping in mind the increasing need for high quality civic services and upgradation
of infrastructure in the National Capital Territory, the Commission is of the view that
the Government of the NCT needs to have access to greater funding - beyond its own
revenues or the grants given to it by the Union Government. The Delhi Government
should be allowed to raise public debt by floating loans in the market, (just like the powers
available to the States). This could be done by an amendment in Article 293; wherever the
word "State" is mentioned, it needs to be replaced by the words "State and UT having a
Legislature". This would be subject to limitations imposed by Article 293(3) and 293 (4)
of the Constitution.
National Capital Region Planning Board
The Commission suggests that:
a) The NCR Planning Board should remain a planning, monitoring and advisory
body in charge of preparing the Master Plan for the NCR Region consisting
of both regional and sub-regional Plans. It should have adequate financial
resources at its disposal so that it could selectively provide financial assistance
to a few schemes of importance.
b) The composition of the 21 member NCR Planning Board should be modified
and only 6 Union Ministers and 3 Chief Ministers (Uttar Pradesh, Haryana
and Rajasthan) should be members of the Board.
c) There should be an Executive Committee under the chairmanship of Secretary
in-charge of Urban Development in Government of India with Secretaries
incharge of Commerce and Industry, Industrial Policy and Promotion,

State and District Administration
Expenditure, Power, Secretary, Road Transport and Highways, Chairman,
Railway Board (all from the Government of India), Chief Secretaries of the
Governments of Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Haryana, Principal Advisor (HUD),
Planning Commission, and Vice Chairman, Delhi Development Authority as
members.
d) Since the Chief Ministers of the three States are members of the Board, the
decisions that are agreed to should be binding on the States concerned. The
NCR approved regional plans / sub-plans should mandatorily be part of the
Plans of the State Governments. The NCR Planning Board Act should be
amended accordingly.
Chandigarh
Originally built as the capital of Punjab, Chandigarh became a Union Territory, the joint
capital of Punjab and Haryana, upon creation of Haryana in 1966. It is thus the seat of
two governments and the UT Administration. The health and education infrastructure of
the UT serves all three as also, to some extent, Himachal and Jammu and Kashmir. There
is a composite High Court for the three entities in Chandigarh. The UT is a single district
and a single tehsil.
The total area of the UT is 114 square kilometers of which 80 kms. are urban and served
by a Municipal Corporation, while 34 kms. are rural and served by a three tier Panchayati
Raj set up. The decadal growth rate of population in this UT has been 400 /0.
The Capital of Punjab (Development and Regulation) Act 1952 provides the structure
for the management of urban governance. Enacted when the construction of Chandigarh
was undertaken as a project, it combines State Government and municipal processes in its
agencies - principally the Estate Officer and the ChiefA dministrator. Conceived as a special
measure of limited duration until institutions of local self governance were established, it
continues to be in force even though the development of Chandigarh is almost complete and
a Municipal Corporation has come into existence. As a result both the UT Administration
and the Municipal Corporation exercise municipal powers which can obviously lead to
administrative confusion. Civic services to 90 per cent of the population of the UT (in
urban areas) are provided by the Municipal Corporation while to the ~emaining 10 per
cent (rural) they are provided by the State Government ( UT Administration). A neat
trifurcation of governance functions is not possible as the infrastructure (water, electricity,
medical services, education) is planned for the UT as a whole. On a reference from the
UT Administration, the Municipal Corporation has agreed to take over all 18 villages in
the UT in a phased manner.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Administrative Set-up
The Punjab Reorganization Act of 1966 provided, inter-alia, that all laws applicable in Punjab
on 1.1.1996 would also continue to apply to the Union Territory. The UT is administered
by the Union Government through an Administrator appointed under Article 239 of the
Constitution. Since 1984 the Administrator has been the Governor of Punjab. Apart from
the four posts ofA dvisor to the Administrator, Inspector General of Police, Conservator of
Forests and Chairman of the Housing Board manned by AGMUT officers, all other posts
are filled up either by deputation of officers from the Governments of Punjab and Haryana
in the ratio of 60:40, or by direct recruitment by Chandigarh Administration.
At present the Administrator is advised by an Advisory Council which he nominates. This
tends to be large, to accommodate various interests in the city, and at times unwieldy. The
meetings also tend to be infrequent. There is no structured political input into decision
mayjng by the Administrator and political advice comes primarily through informal
channels.
The Commission is of the view that there is urgent need to revisit the Capital of Punjab
(Development and Regulation) Act and the Punjab New Capital (Periphery Control) Act,
1952 and examine if and how they are to be aligned with the changed circumstances.
This issue needs to be examined urgently by the Ministry of Home Affairs and the UT
Administration.
The Commission is further of the view that the required legislation for creating the
Metropolitan Planning Committee should be attempted without further delay. It would,
to a large extent, address the problems of the people.
As regards the Advisory Council, the Commission feels that a compact and cohesive body
comprising of inter alia the Member of Parliament from Chandigarh, one MP each from
Punjab and Haryana, the Mayor of Chandigarh and the Advisor to the Administrator
would be able to provide the useful inputs to the Administrator and also be able to meet
more frequently.
The Commission is further of the view that since the UT of Chandigarh is substantially
urban and the 18 villages resemble urban habitats and are inextricably dependant on the
urban infrastructure for their sustenance, the jurisdiction of the Municipal Corporation
should extend over the entire Union"T erritory. Any apprehensions of the 18 villages can
be addressed by Ward/Area Sabhas as recommended in the Commission's Report on Local

State and District Administration
Governance. Also, till such time that the infrastructure in these villages comes at par with
the urban areas of Chandigarh; they may be given necessary (local) tax relief.
Delegation ofA dministrative and Financial Powers
During the visit of the Commission to the Union Territory, it was pointed out that the
proposals forwarded to the Ministry of Home Affairs for approvals often remain pending for
long. It was stated that the present system of over-centralisation affects the administrative
efficiency of the system because of long delays. Inadequate financial delegation to the
Administrator is impeding faster execution of projects and hampers progress. This issue has
become all the more important in view of the increasing demand for better infrastructure
and facilities for the citizens of Chandigarh. The proposed financial delegation could be
as follows:-
Equally important is the matter of delegation of administrative powers to the UT
administration. The Administration does not have the power to create posts. Its powers to
frame recruitment rules is also limited to Group B, C and D posts. The Commission has been
given to understand that the Chandigarh administration is functioning with diminishing
manpower as a certain proportion of posts are abolished each year in accordance with the
direction of the Department of Expenditure. Chandigarh is a revenue surplus UT. The
Commission feels that the UT Administration should have the competence to create certain
categories of posts such as teachers, doctors and para-medical staff which are necessary for
delivering vital services used by the people of the Region.
Puducherry
The Union Territory of Puducherry comprises four areas namely Puducherry, Karaikal,
Mahe and Yanam, which are not geographically contiguous. Puducherry is located in the
East Coast, about 162 kms. south of Chennai. This is the largest among the four regions
and consists of 12 scattered areas interspersed with enclaves ofVillupuram and Cuddalore
Districts of Tamil Nadu. Karaikal is about 160 kms. south of Puducherry and is bounded
by Nagapattinam and Thiruvarur Districts ofT amil Nadu State. Mahe lies almost parallel to
Puducherry 653 kms. away on the west coast near Kannur District of Kerala State. Yanam
is located about 840 kms. north-east of Puducherry and is located in the East Godhavari
District of Andhra Pradesh State. The territory of Puduch~rry was merged with the Indian
Union on 1st November 1954 in terms of the defacto agreement signed between the
Government of India and the Government of France on 21st October 1954. The dejure
transfer of Puducherry took place on 16th August 1962. The Treaty between India and
France for the cession of the French possessions of Puducherry, Karikal, Mahe and Yanam

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
provided, inter alia, that any constitutional change in the special administrative status of the
Territory which was in force prior to 1st November, 1954 (the date on which the de facto
possession of the territory was transferred to the Indian Government), would be made after
ascertaining the wishes of the people of the territory. The Union Territory ofPuducherry is
administered under the provisions of Government of Union Territories Act, 1963.
The Union Territory ofPuducherry is 479 Sq.Kms. in area and has a population of9,74,345
according to the 2001 census. The density of population of the Union Territory is 2034
personsISq.Km. The rural population is 3,25,726 persons (33.430/0) whereas the urban
population is 6,48,619 persons which constitutes 66.57% of the total population.
As against the national pattern, the percentage of population in urban areas is much higher
than the population in rural areas. The entire Mahe and Yanam regions have been classified
as urban. 660/0 of the Union Territory is classified as urban as against the All India level
of 25.70/0. The scheduled Castes population is 1,57,771 and accounts for 16.19% of the
total population. There are no Scheduled Tribes in the UT of Puducherry (according to
the 2001 Census Report). The decadal growth rate of population is 20.620/0, the Territory
has four districts and ninety eight village panchayats.
Strengthening, legislative, financial and administrative power of the UT Administration
(Puducherry)
There has been a consistent demand for granting statehood to Puducherry with special
category status. The Legislative Assembly of Puducherry had passed several resolutions to
this effect. However, the Government of India has not agreed to this demand mainly on
the following grounds:-
(i) It is not eligible to be considered for a special category status as per the guidelines
of the Planning Commission.
(ii) It is not a viable State economically. Out of its total budget of about Rs. 1050
,Its.
crores in the year 2007-08, the UT had a revenue deficit of over 439
crores.
(iii) It consists of four geographically, culturally and linguistically separate segments.
While Puducherry and Karaikal are Tamil speaking, Mahe is Malayalam
speaking and Yanam is Telugu speaking.
(iv) The per capita income of Puducherry is almost double that of neighbouring
Tamil Nadu. Therefore, it cannot be said that development has suffered for
want of Statehood.
• I

State and District Administration
While it is not within the purview of the Commission to examine this issue, it strongly
recommends that the elected government should have adequate powers and authority with
regard to governance and development of the Union Territory as per the aspirations and
requirements of the people.
To this end, there is need to delegate much more administrative and financial powers to
the Union Territory government as indicated in the following paragraphs.
Financial and Administrative Delegation
The Commission is of the view that the elected government in Puducherry must have
unfettered powers with regard to its development and governance as per the needs and
aspirations of the local population. The control of the Union Government in the legislative
and executive domain of the UT Assembly needs to be reduced. Various requirements
of the legislative Bills to be referred to the Union Government and the discretion of the
Administrator in this regard needs to be reconsidered and suitably minimized. This would
require more delegation of administrative and financial powers to the Government which
should be revised once in five years. The Council of Ministers should be free to discharge
its functions within such delegation with freedom and discretion.
Proposed Fmancial Delegation in respect of Puducherry Administration
..
~
Existing Delegation Proposed Delegation
Rule 18 of the DFR- 10.00 Cr 25.00 Cr
Sanction of Projects
Rule 18 of the DFR- 10.00 Cr 20.00 Cr
Expenditure on works
Panchayats in Puducherry
In the Union Territory ofPuducherry, there are only two tiers ofPanchayat namely, Village
Panchayats and Commune Panchayats (Middle level Panchayats) and no District Panchayats.
There are 10 Commune Panchayats and 98 Village Panchayats and they are governed by
the Puducherry Village and Commune Panchayat Acts, 1973. The 73rd Constitutional
amendment was implemented in Puducherry by a Notification dated 24th April, 1993 of
Ministry of Rural Development, Government of India. In addition, a Second notification
was issued on 13th April, 1994 by Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India stating
that the Article 243-ZD of the Constitution shall apply to the UT ofPuducherry with the

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
modification that the 'intermediate-level' shall substitute the word 'district-level' in the
said Articles.
The Commission has recommended a slew of measures in its sixth Report on "Local
governance" to strengthen and empower local government institutions, which needs to be
implemented on priority.
Power to raise public debt
Similar to Delhi, the Puducherry Administration, though having a Legislative Assembly
is not permitted to raise pubic debt which does not seem to be appropriate. This issue has
been examined in detail earlier in this Chapter while dealing with Delhi Administration.
The Commission feels that Puducherry should be treated at par with Delhi and the
recommendations made therein should equally apply in case of Puducherry as well.
Andaman and Nicobar Islands
The territory of the An dam an and Nicobar Islands comprises of a group of 572 islands, islets
and rocks lying in the south-eastern part of the Bay of Bengal. It has a total geographical
area of 8249 sq. kms. and 38 of its islands are inhabited. There are three districts, namely
North and Middle Andamans, South Andamans and Nicobar. The total population of the
UT as per the 2001 census is 3,56,152 with a population density of 43 per sq. km. Most of
the people are from mainland, particularly the West Bengal, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu,
etc. giving the territory the sobriquet "Little India". Andamans is also home to indigenous
tribes, four of which are Negritos, namely the Great Andamanese, Onge, Jarawa and
Sentinalese who live in forests in the Andaman group of islands and two are Mongoloid
tribes, namely the Nicobarese and Shompens living in the Nicobar Islands. Some of these
tribes are on the verge of extinction and some, particularly the Sentinalese, are still hostile.
Their prime mode of livelihood is hunting and fishing.
Key administrative and development issues
Need for restructuring existing institutions
Due to its geographical location and its unique features, providing good governance to the
A & N Islands is a major challenge. Its strategic security concerns, preservation of natural
resources, development, empowerment oflocal governments, involvement oflocal people in
the administration, protection of the endangered tribes, transport and connectivity are major
issues of governance to be reckoned with. There is need to balance the conflicting nature
of many of the concerns. The present institutional set-up, both at the UT and the Union

State and District Administration
levels has not been able to adequately meet these administrative challenges. On the other
hand, there continues to be a growing demand for people's voice and representation in the
governance of the Islands which is lacking mainly due to the absence of strong institutions
of democratic governance and adequate decentralization of power. There has also been a
demand for a Legislative Assembly on the pattern of Delhi and Puducherry.
While it may not be feasible to have an elected Legislative Assembly in this territory,
the Commission feels that it is important to restructure and strengthen the institutional
arrangements both at the Union and UT levels in the interests of administrative expediency,
efficiency and closer involvement of the inhabitants so that they have a voice in the Island's
administration and governance.
At the UT level, a three-tier Panchayati Raj system is in place and the Commission's
recommendations on Local Self Governance in its sixth Report at paragraphs 4.1.4.4,4.1.5.4,
4.2.3.10 and 4.4.7 would further strengthen them. But between these PRIs and the Home
Minister's Advisory Committee/ IDA there is a great hiatus and hence there is need for an
effective local but high level consultative institution. The Commission feels that this could
be in the form of an Administrator's Advisory Council comprising the Chief Secretary, the
local Member of Parliament, Chairperson ofZila Parish ad and Municipal bodies and senior
representatives of the Ministries of Home Affairs, Tribal Affairs, Environment, Forests and
Defence and the Planning Commission. This Committee should be able to provide an
intermediate platform for meaningful consultations and suggestions for the consideration
of the Administrator and the Union Government.
Since the issues facing the Islands are multi-faceted and require large financial and special
manpower resources, the Union Government will necessarily have to continue to play
a leadership role in facilitating the Islands' future development and ensuring security of
this strategic area. Neither the Home Minister's Advisory Council (because of infrequent
meetings) nor the Island Development Authority has been able to fully realize this mandate.
Even though very important directions have emanated from the IDA by the Prime Minister,
the fact is that these meetings are burdened with far too many items of somewhat routine
nature which do not require the intervention of such a high level body. The Commission,
therefore, feels that these two high level Committees may be replaced by more functional
bodies. The IDA could be replaced by a multi-disciplinary task force under the Deputy
Chairman, Planning Commission which would lay down the road map for the Andaman
& Nicobar Islands Administration both for medium term and long term perspective plan
and monitoring its implementations. The Home Minister's Advisory Committee may be
replaced by a Committee under the Chairmanship of the Home Secretary with officers of
suitable seniority from the Ministries of Environment and Forests, Tribal Affairs, Finance,

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Defence, Shipping and Planning Commission to examine and give prima facie approval to
important proposals. Some of the key issues which would need to be kept in mind while
preparing any plans or proposals for the Andaman & Nicobar Islands are listed below.
Carrying capacity oft he Islands
Despite the fact that several islands are uninhabited and there are occasional proposals to
inhabit some of these in a planned manner, there is also a point of view that the carrying
capacity of the islands has perhaps already been exceeded. This issue, therefore, needs to
be addressed.
Endangered Tribes
The Andaman & Nicobar Islands have about 30,000 tribals and in the past they have
suffered as their habitat shrank and land was increasingly appropriated for government
use, etc. In the last meeting of the Island Development Authority, the Prime Minister
had directed that there is need to evolve a sensitive approach towards tribals especially the
primitive tribal groups. There is need to learn from the experience of the implementation
of policy on Jarawa tribes while formulating the policy on other primitive tribal groups.
The Ministries of Home Affairs and Tribal Affairs need to have close coordination in this
connection.
Administrative and Financial Delegation
The Administrator ofA &N Islands is vested with financial powers as per the Delegation of
Financial Rules, 1978. The Ministry of Home Affairs has from time to time re-delegated
powers to the Administrator in those important items as necessary for the smooth
functioning of the administration. The powers so delegated and the proposed enhancement
could be summarized in the following manner:-
SL Nature of Powers Extent of the present The proposed enhancement
No. delegation (Its. in Crores) (Ra. in Crores)
1. Sanction of works 10.00 25.00
2.' Normal contract/purchase 5.00 20.00
3. N egotiated/ single
tender contract 1.00 5.00
4. Indent for stores of
proprietory nature 1.00 5.00
5. Indent for stores of
proprietory nature
(for power sector only) 3.00 5.00

State and District Administration
c..itI.
_ 'i.~'
SL NiaIre of Powers 'Ihe pmposed - ........,
No. del...... "liICmns) (Its. in Crores)
-
6. Direct purchase on
grounds of emergency 0.30 0.50
7. Approval of Plan Schemes 10.00 25.00
8. Procurement of Ship 10.00 50.00
The Commission is of the view that there is an urgent need to address this issue and ensure
adequate administrative/financial powers to the Andaman & Nicobar Administration, which
. should be revised once in five years.
Lakshadweep
The Union Territory of Lakshadweep is a group of 37 Islands with a total land area of 32
sq.km. Considering the lagoon area of 4,200 Sq.kms, 20,000 Sq.kms of territorial waters and
about 4lakhs Sq.kms. of economic zone, Lakshadweep is a fairly large territory. It consists of
ten inhabited and 17 uninhabited islands, four newly formed islets and 5 submerged reefs.
The inhabited islands are Kavaratti, Agatti, Amini, Kadmat, Kiltan, Chedat, Bitra, Andrott,
Kalpeni and Minicoy, popularly known as Laccadives. Its total population is 60,650 with
an urban component of 44.470/0. Its literacy rate is 86.7%. It consists of only one district
which is a Lok Sabha Constituency too.
Administration in Lakshadweep: Need for an apex representative structure for the UT
The Commission is of the view that the issues of governance in the Lakshadweep Islands are
more or less similar to those of the A&N Islands, though in a smaller measure. There are
strategic security concerns, preservation of natural resources, development, empowerment
of local governments, involvement of local people in the administration; transport and
connectivity. In order to meet the challenges of governance in these Islands, the Commission
suggested a new institutional set up in the case of the A&N Islands. These suggestions
would be applicable to Lakshadweep also with suitable modifications. Accordingly, an
Advisory Council to the Administrator of Lakshadweep may be constituted consisting
of the local Member of Parliament, Chairman of the Zila Parishad and representatives of
the Ministries of Home Affairs, Tribal Affairs, Environment, Forests and Defence and the
Planning Commission. The Home Minister's Advisory Committee for Lakshadweep may be
replaced by a Committee under the Chairmanship of the Home Secretary with officers of
suitable seniority from the Ministries of Environment and Forests, Tribal Affairs, Finance,
11

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Defence, Shipping and Planning Commission to examine and give prima facie approval
to important proposals concerning the UT administration.
As suggested in the case of the A&N Islands, the IDA to be replaced by a multi-disciplinary
task force under the Deputy Chairman of the Planning Commission could also lay down
guidelines for preparing and monitoring the medium and long term perspective plans for
overall development of the Lakshadweep islands.
Local Government
The Commission has considered all major issues pertaining to the strengthening and
empowerment of PRIs in its Report on "Local Governance" and suggested a number of
measures to increase their efficacy. The Ministry of Home Affairs may take immediate steps
to implement these recommendations in Lakshadweep.
Financial and Administrative Delegation
As in the case of other Union Territories, the model financial delegation could be as
under:-
I
Sr. Items of Expenditure Existing Financial Proposed Financial
No. Delegation Delegation
1. Rule 18 of the DFR
Expenditure on Schemes/Projects (Plan) 5.00 Crore 10.00
2. Rule 18 of the DFR
Expenditure on Works (Plan) 2.40 Crore 5.00
3. Rule 21 of the DFR
Expenditure on indents/ Purchases Same as above 5.00
The delegated powers should be revised once in five years. Within these powers, the UT
Administration should be given full administrative and functional autonomy.
Daman and Diu and Dadra & Nagar Haveli
Daman & Diu
Located on the Western Coast Daman & Diu is the second smallest Union Territory of
India. Daman is situated near Surat while Diu is located close to Junagadh in the Saurashtra
Peninsula of Gujarat. Till 1987, Daman & Diu were parts of the UT of Goa. When Goa
became a fullfledged State, they were converted in to a separate UT, consisting of 2 districts

State and District Administration
Daman & Diu. It has an area 112 Sq.Km. with a population of 1,58;204 and literacy rate
78.200/0.
Dadra & Nagar Haveli
The UT ofDadra & Nagar Haveli with a population of2,20,490 and literacy rate of57.6%
consists of two separate enclaves. Dadra is surrounded by the State of Gujarat, whereas
Nagar Haveli lies on the borders between Maharashtra and Gujarat. Dadra consists 9f three
villages and Nagar Haveli consists of a town named Silvassa and 68 villages wit~ an area
of 491 Sq.Km. The territory is inhabited by a number of ethnic groups, viz. the Varlis, .
Dublas, Dhodias and Koknans. Agriculture is the main occupation and the area produces
rice, pulses and fruits. Dadra & Nagar Haveli came under Portuguese Rule between 1783
and 1785. It became a Union Territory in 1961. Silvassa, its capital is about 14 Kms, from
Bhilad and Vapi.
Administration oft he UT and Local Government
Daman & Diu
The scheme of devolution reveals that the execution of only certain schemes has been given
to the Panchayats. The responsibilities of the Panchayats remain vague. Even for schemes
which stand transferred to the Panchayats, the allocations are woefully inadequate. The
Commission feels that departments like education and health which account for the bulk
of the functionaries as well as the budget can be transferred to Panchayats without much
delay. Civic services such as provision of drinking water, sanitation, and street lighting could
also be handed over to the Panchayats.
The delegation of financial powers to Panchayats too, is restricted. A Sarpanch is authorized
to spend only Rs.500 in cash on a project. He can purchase materials upto Rs.5000 but only
after obtaining prior approval of the Block Development Officer. The income from taxes
and fees collected by the Village Panchayat is meager and needs to be increased substantially
through better mobilization of tax revenues and supplemented by financial assistance from
government. More powers need to be given to the Panchayats so that they can utilize their
funds for the benefit of their areas. The institutional linkage between the two tiers ofPanchayat
as well as that between the Panchayats and the government departments are weak.
Dadra & Nagar Haveli
The Commission has examined the relevant in its sixth Report on 'Local Governance' and
has made a number of important recommendations covering devolution of functions, activity

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
mapping, devolution of fund, resource generation by Panchayats, personnel management,
issues of accountability etc. The Commission reiterates that the implementation of these
recommendations would go a long way in strengthening local government institutions in
these Union Territories.
Financial delegation
Under the "Delegation of Financial Powers Rules, 1978" the Government of India has been
delegating financial powers under various categories to the Administrator of the Union
Territories. Under Rule 13 of the DFR, the Administrator has been given full powers with
respect to contingent and miscellaneous expenditure. But for sanction of a new schemel
project (under Rule 18 of the DFR), the Administrator's power is limited only upto Rs.5
crores whereas, for expenditure on works, the Administrator's power goes upto Rs.2.4
crores. For speedier decision making and faster implementation of projects, these powers
need to be enhanced. The proposed enhancement in the delegation of financial power for
both the above Territories could be as under:-
.
Sr. Items of Expenditure Existing Financial Proposed Financial
No. Ddegation (Rs. in Delegation (Rs. in
crore) crore)
l. Rule 18 of the DFR, Expenditure on
Schemes/ Projects (Plan) 5 10
2. Rule 18 of the DFR
Expenditure on Works (Plan) 2.4 5
3. Rule 21 of the DFR, Expenditure Same as above Same as above
on Indents/Purchases
Issue ofh uman resources
Over a period of time, there has been significant increase in the activities of the UT
Administration because of rapid growth and establishment of business and industrial activity
in the area with a consequent increase in the population.
The Commission feels that in the interests of good governance, there is need to have adequate
staff at operational levels in the different departments in both the UTs. Any attempt to
fix the number of government employees on the basis of a pre-conceived notion of right
sizing will not be fair. There is need to rationalize the size of the governmental machinery
by suitably adjusting the strength of the staff on the basis of functional requirements. The
operating levels must be adequately manned. At the same time, the government needs to
examine the issue of having so many senior level posts in Daman & Diu.

State and District Administration
GOVERNANCE ISSUES IN THE NORTH-EASTERN STATES
Ethnic conflicts - in places, manifesting as territoriAl conflicts and violence (problem
ofi nsurgency and law and order)
The Vision 2020 document in respect of the North Eastern Region has aptly noted that
'Insurgency and underdevelopment, especially unemployment, feed on each other. Poor
governance, corruption and economic performance sustain conditions for insurgency and
alienation.' It has also come to the conclusion that ' ... insurgency continuously hampers
the economic performance of the region, so rapid economic development will not be
possible without a proper strategic and security policy by the Central Government'. It has
also identified the minima required. ' ... free and unhindered mobility of goods and services
(infrastructure) across the region as well as within the region; well-defined property rights;
and law and order and security of life ... ' .
The document has further noted that 'not less than 40 armed groups function in seven
States, although only a clutch are dominant and powerful enough to make a substantial
impact. The smaller ones function often either as extortionist rings or as part of a network
of informers and rent collectors for the bigger ones ... '
'Many of the armed groups are widely viewed in the NER as extortionists who have
lost public support and have become, in the eyes of many, illegal enterprises which prey
on fear and vulnerability and profit from extensive corruption, rent-seeking and poor
governance' .
A good law and order situation is a necessary condition for a robust economic development.
It is also necessary for good governance as insurgents seek to intimidate public servants
and interfere in political processes. Public servants have been killed in the line of duty,
and assassination attempts made on political figures. The Commission is aware that both,
the Union and the State Governments have been taking necessary steps to deal with the
situation arising out of insurgency and poor public order in the North East. However, since
the situation is still far from satisfactory, several more measures need to be considered. On
the basis of discussions held with the State Governments and with people well conversant
with the region, the Commission would specifically like to recommend the following:-
i. Need for continued political dialogue: Political dialogue to address genuine
and legitimate concerns will need to continue. The experience of Mizoram,
where peace was established through negotiations after years of insurgency is an

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
example ofw hat is possible through sincere, wise and good faith dialogue. Any
agreement arrived as a result of such dialogue, however, needs to be adhered to
rigo'rously., At present there is an agreement between the Union Government
and one of the major insurgent groups. Butit has been brought to the notice of
the Commission that these are being constantly flouted by the insurgent groups.
For example, the agreement stipulates that insurgents must stay in designated
camps and not venture out with arms. Notwithstanding this agreement,
armed groups are reported to be active in Manipur and Arunachal Pradesh,
thus flouting this important condition of the ceasefire. Laxity in adherence to
agreements devalues the process of negotiations and it is, therefore, necessary
to ensure that all parties to the agreement abide by their commitments.
ii. The police must act to uphold the law. The police is an instrument of the State
Government and maintenance oflaw and order is the responsibility of the State
Government. In its earlier Reports on Public Order and Conflict Resolution,
the Commission had recommended that law and order problems must be
handled by the State Police with the Armed Forces in the background. The
Commission re-iterates these recommendations and again emphasizes that it
would be necessary to upgrade the capacity and capability of the police forces
through better training, better arms and, wherever required, more manpower.
Since the State Governments lack adequate financial and training resources,
the Union Government will need to make special provisions in respect of these
States.
iii. Diplomatic efforts: Diplomatic efforts aimed at controlling cross border
movement of insurgents have yielded good results in the past. For example,
the denial of sanctuaries in Bhutan to insurgents in Assam contributed to
improvement of law and order in that State. No doubt, similar efforts are on
going between the Government of India and Governments of neighboring
countries like Bangladesh and Myanmar, and these need to be pursued to bring
about positive results.
Enhanced Role oft he Union Government
The Commission is of the view that while the role of the State Governments in ensuring
stability in their respective jurisdiction (region) is critical, in view of the extenuating
circumstances which are listed below, the Union Government's active support and
intervention, needs to be further strengthened:-

State and District Administration
(a) Insurgency and cases of extortion have inter-state ramifications and the Ministry
of Home Affairs would, therefore, have a special responsibility to ensure
necessary coordination pertaining to intelligence, conducting joint operations
etc.
(b) With the exception of Tripura and Sikkim, all the hill States abut Assam, as
they were carved out ofA ssam. There are a number of boundary disputes which
every now and then erupt into confrontation between people and between
States. Boundary disputes cannot be left to the States to manage and the Union
Government has a significant role in steering agreements. Boundary disputes
often distract attention from more fundamental concerns like insurgency and
should not be permitted to occupy centre-stage.
(c) The Vision 2020 documents have identified various measures that need to
be taken for the human resource and economic development of the North
Eastern Region. The main challenge, however, is timely implementation. The
Commission, therefore, would suggest that the Union Government (Ministry
of Home Affairs, Planning Commission and subject matter Ministry) along
with State Governments specify specific targets within important parameters
(for example infant mortality reduction, increased literacy, productivity in the
primary sector, connectivity etc.) that should be set for achieving these in a
definite time frame. Five year Plans and Annual Plans should flow from these
targets.
(d) At present, the work pertaining to the North Eastern Region is primarily
allocated to the Ministry of Home Affairs and the Ministry of Development of
North Eastern Region. In its seventh Report, the Commission has recommended
the winding up of the Ministry of DONER and suggested that the Home
Ministry may be the nodal Ministry in respect of this region and that the
North Eastern Council should be suitably strengthened and restructured. On
further consideration, the Commission would like to suggest some additional
measures at the Union Government level to deal with the North Eastern Region,
as follows:-
Ministry ofH ome Affairs
i) At present there is a North East Division in the Ministry of Home Affairs which
is headed by a Joint Secretary. The Commission, however, feels that for handling
the increased workload (with many issues of a sensitive nature), a separate

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Wing in the Ministry of Home Affairs under either a Special Secretary or an
Additional Secretary familiar with the North East Region and with adequate
manpower should be created.
ii) A Standing Committee of the National Development Council (NDC) with the
responsibility of overseeing the formulation and implementation of the Plans
for the region should be constituted. Since law and order and development
are inter-related this Committee would also need to have security issues that
impinge on development in its purview. The Standing Committee may be
headed by a Cabinet Minister selected by the Prime Minister and should report
twice a year to the Chairman, NDC.
Provisions oft he Sixth Schedule oft he Constitution with respect to Assam, Meghalaya,
Tripura andMizoram
One of the most important features of administration in the north-east is the Sixth Schedule '
of the Constitution which provides for the setting up of Autonomous Regional/District
Councils in the four States of Assam, Tripura, Meghalaya and Mizoram. These provisions
have been made in exercise of the enabling provisions given in Article 244 (2) and 275 (1) of
the Constitution. Currently, ten Autonomous Councils are functioning in these States.
Need for redrafting some provisions oft he Sixth Schedule
Over the years, the Sixth Schedule has undergone more than ten amendments. The amended
provisions have been 'anchored' rather disjointedly in the text of the Schedule making their
reading and comprehension a rather cumbersome exercise. There is need to bring clarity.
The Commission is of the view that an exercise can be undertaken to incorporate provisions
which currently occur as footnotes, in the main text of the Schedule. This will make the
Schedule more accessible to members of the public.
Adhoc transfer ofs ubjects / activities to the Autonomous Councils
Sixth Schedule Councils in Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram have been given
legislative powers with respect to the subjects listed in para 3 of the Schedule. In addition,
these Councils have also been given powers to legislate on few additional subjects under
para 3A and 3B of the Schedule; 3A with respect to NCHAC and KAAC and 3B for BTC.
The legislation under 3A and 3B, however, needs prior assent of the President. Alongwith
the legislative powers, some explicit executive and regulatory functions have also been
entrusted to the Councils.

State and District Administration
The Commission is of the view that there is need to ensure devolution of activities relating
to subjects mentioned in Para 3, 3A and 3B of the Schedule to the Autonomous Councils ..
While devolving activities the functions and responsibilities should be clearly delineated
between different levels of administrative structures based on the principal of subsidiarity.
In this context, it would be useful to refer to and adopt principles enunciated by the
Commission for local bodies in its Report on 'Local Governance' (sixth Report - Para
4.2.3.10). This will necessitate full transfer of field offices and institutions dealing with
transferred functions and activities to the control of the Councils. The concerned State
Governments may set up a Task Force to complete this work within a time bound manner
(one year). A similar excercise will need to be carried out by the Union Government in
respect of the Centrally Sponsored Schemes which are being implemented in these areas.
Predominance of non-elected customary heads / bodies at the village level; issue of village self
governance in the Sixth Schedule areas
When the Sixth Schedule arrangements were formulated in the North-East, tribal customs
reigned supreme in these areas. During the early years of the Constitution, there was no
thought of elections at the village or district level and hence there was nothing unusual in
the Sixth Schedule not paying attention to the democratic aspect of village self governance.
The idea of a two / three tier elected panchayat structure germinated only with the
Balwant Rai Mehta Committee Report in 1957. With various rural development schemes
and programmes becoming village centric and with Panchayats (in non scheduled areas)
increasingly becoming involved in implementation of such programmes, the issue of village
governance in scheduled areas came to the fore.
The Commission examined this issue in its Report on Capacity Building for Conflict
Resolution (7th Report) while dealing with conflicts in the North East and came to the
conclusion that :-
a. Measures should be taken to ensure that all the Autonomous Councils pass
suitable legislation for establishing of village level bodies with well defined
powers and a transparent system of allocation of resources.
b. Stipulation may be made in the rules relating to release of grants to the
Autonomous Councils to the effect that passage of appropriate legislation for
elected village level bodies and its implementation, will entitle the Councils
to additional funding.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
c. It is imperative that in all States where village bodies administer justice under
customary laws by virtue of the Sixth Schedule or other laws, such laws are
duly codified.
The Commission reiterates the above views. As is envisaged the village level Councils will
need to be constituted by law to be passed by the respective Autonomous Councils. It may
be worth while to briefly enunciate certain general principals that may be followed by the
Councils while constituting village level Councils within their jurisdiction. Apart from the
elected members, the traditional village functionaries will also need to be included in these
Village Councils as ex-officio members. However, it needs to be ensured that the majority
of the members are elected. The Village Councils so constituted should be involved and
made responsible for implementation of development schemes at the village level including
planning, site selection, monitoring of implementation and selection of beneficiaries. Their
role could be equated with Village Panchayats in implementation of schemes meant to be
imp~lehiented through the PRIs. At the same time the Commission feels that the appropriate
District Council legislation may, if considered advisable, provide for different arrangements
for administration of justice and prevention of crimes.
Absence ofl inkage between the Sixth Schedule and the 73rd Amendment
While examining various characteristics of conflicts in the North East in its Seventh Report,
(dealing with Conflict Resolution) the Commission observed that, "another emerging area
of conflict is the rising disparity between the autonomous Councils and the local bodies
established in pursuance of the Seventy-third Amendment as the latter are being more
liberally funded through the State Finance Commissions. This disparity is likely to become
particularly important in Assam and Tripura where both categories of local bodies co-exist.
Similarly, there is a feeling of discontent in the two older Councils of Assam over what
is perceived as preferential treatment to the new autonomous Council viz the Bodoland
Territorial Council, in the matter of procedures relating to release of funds as well as the
basis of budget allocations etc. While Article 243 M (1) expressly exempts areas under the
Sixth Schedule from operation of the Seventy-third Amendment, there is no bar on some
of the arrangements introduced by it to be engrafted in that Schedule." (Para 12.6.3.1.6)
Special powers of the Governors ofA ssam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram with
respect to Sixth Schedule Areas.
The Sixth Schedule has vested the Governor of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram
with considerable special powers for administration of autonomous districts and regional
councils.

State and District Administration
The issue of giving more discretionary powers to the Governors in the Sixth Schedule areas
in general was also taken up by the Commission in its Report on Conflict Resolution. The
Commission observed that,
"During the Commission's visit to Assam and Meghalaya, representatives oft he Councils
expressed dissatisfaction about their interface with the State Governments concerned - there
was a feeling that these autonomous bodies are treated as extensions oft he Government.
While the various provisions of the Schedule create an impression that the Governor
under that Schedule is to act at his discretion, the present position is that in almost all
matters the Governor acts on the aid and advice oft he Council ofM inisters. This is an
important issue. There are provisions in the Schedule which envisage a role for the State
Government. Paragraph 14(3), for instance, requires that one of the Ministers of the
Government be put in charge with the subject of autonomous districts. Sub-paragraph
(2) of the same provision requires that the report of Commission for inquiring into the
affairs ofa utonomous Districts and creation of new Districts etc will be laid before the
State legislature. Similarly, paragraph 15 dealing with annulment of resolutions and
suspension of Councils, and paragraph 16 which enables their dissolution are subject
respectively to the powers of revocation and approval oft he State legislature. For matters
requiring approval or ratification oft he Assembly, it is obvious that the Governor would
be acting on the 'aid and advice' within the meaning ofA rticle 163 (1) oft he Constitution
and not on his discretion. There are other provisions, however, where there is scope for the
Governor to act in his judgment after obtaining inputs from suitable sources including the
State Government. Some oft hese provisions would appear to be conferment ofp owers on
the Councils under the Code of Civil Procedure (CPC) and the CrPC (para 5); powers
to approve Council legislations and regulations (paragraphs 3 and 8); resolving disputes
about mining licences and leases (para 9) etc. The Commission is oft he view that having
regard to the spirit oft he wide autonomy that underlines the Sixth Schedule, this aspect
needs to be examined by the Ministry ofH ome Affairs. "
Accordingly, the following recommendation was made:-
"Ministry ofH ome Affairs may, in consultation with the concerned State Governments
and the Autonomous Councils, identify powers under the Sixth Schedule that Governors
may exercise at their discretion without having to act on the 'aid and advice' oft he Council
ofM inisters as envisaged in Article 163 (1) oft he Constitution. "
While reiterating, the above recommendation, the Commission would like to go a step further
in the present Report and examine the issue of discretionary powers which have been given
to the Governor by the provisions of paragraphs 20 BA and BB of the Sixth Schedule.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Provisions ofp aragraph 20 BA and 20 BB
The Commission is of the view that the spirit of the Constitution and the amending Acts
which introduced paragraphs 20BA and 20BB in the Sixth Schedule was to protect the
autonomy of the tribal areas and to save them from the decisions of the overwhelming
majority. The Governor enjoys these special powers as a custodian of tribal interests and
hence he needs to be adequately empowered to do so. Any attempt to impose the views
of the State' Council of Ministers on the Governor may defeat the very purpose for which
these paragraphs were introduced in the Sixth Schedule. As such the Commission feels
that to put matters beyond doubt the Governors of Assam, Tripura and Mizoram may
be empowered to exercise discretionary powers in respect of the provisions pertaining
to Autonomous Councils under the Sixth Schedule in consultation with the Council of
Ministers and if necessary, in consultation with these Councils. A Constitutional amendment
will be required for this purpose
Constitution ofa Commission to submit a report on the administration ofa utonomous districts
and autonomous regions: (Paragraph 14 oft he Sixth Schedule)
This issue has also been dealt with by the Commission in its seventh Report. The observation
of the Commission is;
'~t the commencement oft he Constitution andf or more than two decades thereafter, all
the Autonomous Districts were located within the State ofA ssam. It was therefore quite
in order in that State for the Governor to appoint a Commission to inquire into the state
ofa dministration in such districts and to examine other matters mentioned in paragraph
14. With four States now having such districts, this arrangement deserves reconsideration.
Besides, in the last two decades this provision has not been invoked at all resulting in lower
standards ofg overnance in these sensitive areas. In the opinion oft he Commission, there
is a case for a common Commission for all Autonomous Districts under the Schedule by
the Union Government and for providing appointment ofs uch a Commission at fixed
intervals. The Commission also notes that a similar recommendation has been made by
the Expert Committee of the Ministry ofP anchayati Raj headed by one of its members
(Shri V. Ramachandran). ))
It was accordingly recommended that:-
''Paragraph 14 of the Sixth Schedule may be suitably amended to enable the Union
Government to appoint a common Commission for all autonomous districts for assessing
their state of administration and making other recommendations envisaged in that
paragraph. A periodicity may also be provided for the Commission. ))

State and District Administration
The Commission would like to reiterate these recommendations.
Constitution ofa High Level Review Committee headed by the Governor
In order to examine the functioning of these bodies, and to assess the problems that arise in
their day to day operations in each Sixth Schedule State, the Governor himself should lead
a high level review committee consisting of representatives from the State Government as
well as the District/Autonomous Councils. This will help him make appropriate suggestions
to the Union Government on Sixth Schedule issues.
Special provisions in the Constitution under Articles 371A, 371B, 371C, 371F, 371G
& 371H applicable to North-Eastern States
Issues of Tribal Areas lying outside the Sixth Schedule
With the States of Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim being brought under the Seventy-Third
Amendment and almost the whole of 'tribal Assam' covered by the Sixth Schedule, the
areas falling under this classification are the State of Nagaland and the Hill Districts of
Manipur.
Nagaland has made significant progress in empowering the village community. The village
community participates in grass root level development programmes in close association
with the traditional village chief. Communitization is an effective instrument to ensure that
the institutions and services set up for their benefit operate efficiently and are accountable
to the beneficiaries. Care is needed to ensure that communitization and village development
boards do not become mutually antithetical. The decision of the State Government to declare
each Village authority a 'local authority' within the meaning of the Communitization Act
is a step in the right direction, It can be said that Nagaland is the only State in the North
East where local empowerment has been more impressive at the village than at the higher
levels - evidently an offshoot of the State not being covered by the Sixth Schedule (with
emphasis on empowerment of autonomous Districts). A scheme of Autonomous Area
Councils- tribe specific bodies conforming to the then existing districts was tried in 1970s
but it turned out to be a short-lived affair. While it may not be desirable to lay down any
formulation for the State from outside, its long term development will be better served if
the process of decentralized self governance is carried forward to the supra village level.
In Manipur, on the other hand, there are no village level elected bodies. The Village
Development Committees are purely nominated bodies, often the nominees of the
traditional village leaders. The Hill District Councils are moribund for the last seventeen
years, elections having been held as far back as in 1985. The persistent demand for declaration

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
of the Hill Areas in the Sixth Schedule has caused a stalemate. The case against acceptance
of this demand appears to be based on apprehensions about 'integrity of the State' and
'exacerbation of existing tensions'. It is not for the Commission to express any view as to
the merits of the rival claims, but it has been observed that with the implementation of the
Seventy-Third Amendment in the valley districts, there has been a significant improvement in
various growth indices such as poverty ratio, literacy percentages and rural connectivity.
The Commission believes that for tribal areas which lie outside the Sixth Schedule as well
as the Seventy-Third Amendment, the Ministries of Rural Development and Panchayat Raj
and the Planning Commission should provide special incentives to the States concerned
to devise ways and means of managing their District Rural Development Agencies in such
a way that the DRDA function as bodies accountable to District Level Institutions which
could be a mix of elected and traditionally selected members. This process could be taken
further after assessing its initial impact.
Personnel Management and Capacity Building ofA dministration
The Commission has suggested a large number of measures for improvement of personnel
management in the North-Eastern States earlier in its seventh and tenth reports. They need
to be implemented.
Training of Government Personnel
The Commission is of the view that the training needs of government personnel should be
addressed on a priority basis, (i) Every government employee should undergo a long duration
induction training when he joins service, (ii) There should be provision for mid career
training, and (iii) Officials should be encouraged to acquire higher professional qualifications
and skills in their respective branches and also in subjects such as - Public Administration,
Policy, Trade laws, project investment, appraisal, management and information technology
applications. Recruitment/Promotion Rules for senior officers need to be amended to give
adequate importance and weightage to mid career capability acquisitions. The Commission is
also of the view that since the States of the region are small, setting up a centre of excellence
in each of them does not seem to be a viable proposition; there is need to have a properly
equipped central institution catering to the training needs of all the eight States.
While dealing with the 'Conflicts in the North East" in its seventh Report, the Commission
recommended that "Regional training institutions for various branches of administration,
including the technical services may be operated by the North Eastern Council." Taking it

State and District Administration
further, the Commission feels that the NEC should establish an apex Regional Academy
for Human Resource Development, as an autonomous body with academic and executive
flexibility. The mandate of the Academy may extend to the entire range of services under
the government. Besides running (flagship training programmes' for all the NE States, the
Academy should give emphasis to overall planning and implementation of human resource
development, preparation of Regional handbooks and manuals for various sectors and
designing applied and action research professional courses in coordination with various
Universities and institutions in the country.
Strengthening pre recruitment facilities
The representation of the tribal population of the North East in the civil services shows a
downward trend. This issue needs to be addressed on priority. Adequate local representation
in the mainstream administration will help in addressing the issue of perceived alienation.
The Commission feels that since private sector growth has not occurred in the region
adequately, there is little scope for employment of qualified personnel in this area. Steps
are necessary to improve their chances of selection into civil services and other competitive
examinations including recruitment to the Armed Forces etc. Measure taken in this direction
by the Ministries of Social Justice and Empowerment and Tribal Affairs have not yielded the
desired results. Therefore, efforts are needed to involve educational institutions, particularly
the Universities of the region in running Orientation and Coaching programmes. The NEC
can coordinate these efforts.
Issues ofR ecruitment in the Sixth Schedule Areas
Autonomous Councils have frequently pleaded for separation of cadres of (Line Departments'
whose functions figure in the list of responsibilities assigned to these bodies under Paragraph
3, or 3A (the two older Assam Councils) or 3B (the BTC). Such proposals have varied
from having a (composite cadre' for the Scheduled Districts to District specific outfits. In
Assam, the recruitment of medical officers in the BTC areas was delegated to the Bodo
Tribal Council. This approach is likely to cause problems in retaining qualified training
personnel. The prospect of spending an entire career in a Scheduled District or in the Sixth
Schedule areas deters them from joining the service. The Commission feels that there is need
to adopt a procedure which would ensure lead to retention of technical and professional
expertise. Thus, while steps are necessary to ensure that technical and other personnel remain
in position in Sixth Schedule and other tribal areas, creating separate cadres for overall
administration does not appear to be a viable proposition. While it is advisable to constitute
District cadres for Group C and D posts, recruitments to the higher levels should be left
to the State Governments. The State Government and the Councils should jointly devise

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
a way so that the requirement of tribal areas gets precedence over that of the other areas.
The Officer should have fixed tenure in the tribal areas (unless they voluntarily desire to
continue) and thereafter they should get a posting of their choice as far as possible. Other
incentives such as deputation to training programme both within the country and abroad
and some weightage in departmental promotions could be considered. These steps may
however need State specific adaptation and modifications.
Regional Institutes
In pursuance of a planned strategy for the regional development of the North Eastern States,
over the years, a large number of regional institutes were set up in various fields including
science and technology, water and land management, agriculture, health/medical, education,
power, cane and bamboo technology, training institutes for police, etc. Many of these
institutes were initially set up under the auspices of the North-Eastern Council and later
transferred to Union ~1inistries; for example, the North Eastern Police Academy which is
now wit~ the Home Ministsry and the North-Eastern Energy and Power Corporation, now
with the. Ministry of Power. Others were directly set up by the concerned Ministries and
continue to be with them; for example, North Eastern Indira Gandhi Regional Institute of
Medical Sciences, Shillong under the Ministry of Health, North-Eastern Institute of Bank
Management with the Ministry of Finance etc.
During its visit to the North-Eastern States the Commission was informed that the effective
performance of the Institutes greadyvaried with some of them functioning well and playing
a major role in the regional development in their areas of expertise. However, a number of
other Institutes became ineffective either because of lack of funds and technical resources,
non-availability of competent professionals to head the institutes, etc. Since a great deal of
effort, resources, planning and expectations were involved in setting up these Institutes it
would be essential to review their working, identify the shortcomings and take necessary
action within a stipulated time frame to make them functionally effective institutions
of excellence in the Region. Keeping in view the fact that the North-Eastern Council is
the strategic planning body for the region and the nodal agency for its socio- economic
development it should be given the responsibility to undertake a review of these Institutes
and come up with suitable recommendations for their improvement wherever required.
One of the Members of the NEC could head this Committee with representatives from
the region as well as from the Government of India. In addition, it would be useful if an
Officer/Member of the NEC is represented on the governing body of those Institutes
which are no longer under its administrative supervision/control. Permanent arrangements

State and District Administration
for monitoring the evaluation of these Institutes would also be necessary which could be
based within the NEC. The Commission in its Seventh Report has recommended suitable
strengthening of the NEC (Para 12.6.4.3). Once this is done it should be possible for the
NEC to undertake these additional and important responsibilities.
The Commission is of the view that the North Eastern Hill University (NEHU) could
provide the academic foundation for policy research on issues impinging on the entire
region and which need to be addressed by State action.
Apart from the common issues dealt with above, the States of the NE Region also have some
State specific problems which need attention. These are being discussed in the subsequent
sections of this Report.
Bodoland Tribal Council has been given greater administrative and financial powers and
is treated on a different footing as compared to the Karbi Anglong Autonomous Council
(KAAC) and the North Cachar Hills Autonomous Council (NHAC). This disparity has
been a cause of resentment among the people of the latter two Councils. There is a growing
demand that there should be full parity among the three Councils in terms of legislative
and executive powers and functions. The Commission is of the view that in order to avoid
conflicts, priority steps are needed in this direction.
The Councils can exercise executive powers on all subjects on which they have power to
I legislate. So far the Councils have generally exercised very limited executive powers mainly
l due to paucity of resources. There is need to normatively assess their financial requirements
(with reference to factors such as minimum standards of services, local resource mobilization
potential and the ambit of prescribed responsibility). It goes without saying that this
approach would entail considerably larger subventions from the State Governments. But
the net additional burden on the State on this account is, however, liable to be taken care
of by the Central Finance Commission in due course. The Commission feels that in order
to enable the Autonomous Councils to discharge their responsibilities satisfactorily, it is
imperative that the requirement of funds by these bodies is worked out normatively with
reference to the minimum standards of service to be provided and assessed capacity to raise
local resources. Such exercise could be undertaken by the State Finance Commission.
Apart from making adequate resources available, it is equally important to ensure smooth
and timely flow offunds to the Councils. As per the existing arrangements, the funds are to
be transferred to the Councils in two equal installments. This needs to be strictly adhered to
by the State Government. In the case ofBTC, the funds are released by various departments

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
of the Assam Government in favour of the BTC Department. The BTC Department of
the State Government then acts as a single window for release of funds to the BTC. There
are some exceptions; the Union Ministry of Tribal Affairs routes its allocation through the
State Tribal Welfare Department.
The advantage of a single window system is that the Council is broadly aware of the likely
size of the funds, they would be getting from each department. This system needs to be
further fine tuned to make it more effective and hassle free. Such a hassle free system needs
to be adopted for the other two Councils of this State (KAAC and NCHAC) also with
adequate delegation of financial powers.
Tribe Specific Councils (created under State enactment)
Assam has a significant tribal population living outside the Sixth Schedule areas. These
tribes too have been demanding special powers and budgetary allocations on the pattern
of those given to Sixth Schedule Autonomous Councils. During a period of ten years from
1995-2005, the Government of Assam entered into a Memorandum of Understanding
with a large number of such tribes to establish exclusive Autonomous Councils for them.
The Government legislated to create six 'Tribe Specific' Autonomous Councils (with Village
Councils under them) in different parts of the States. But these Councils are not compact
geographical territories. Since members of a specific tribe may be residing in pockets located
in more than one district, the jurisdiction of a Council often extends to several districts.
Efforts must be made to ensure that as far as possible the role to be performed by tribe
specific bodies does not overlap that of the Panchayati institutions. It must be borne in mind
that in areas of mixed ethnic composition existence of bodies with overlapping jurisdiction
should not be allowed to exacerbate communal conflicts and tensions. It would appear
that such objectives could best be achieved if the functional responsibilities of the two
streams are kept as distinct as possible. This is particularly so in a situation where successful
and effective implementation of the programmes implemented through the Panchayati
institutions will benefit tribals and non tribals alike.
The Expert Committee on Planning for the Sixth Schedule Areas formed by the Ministry
of Panchayati Raj under the Chairmanship of Shri V. Ramachandran made the following
important observations in this regard:-
"An ~xamination of the functioning of these councils shows a picture of confusion. The
Panchayati Raj system continues to exist in these areas, as there is no constitutional basis
for their removal. These areas are not exempt from Panchayati Raj in the same manner as

State and District Administration
other areas such as Nagaland and hill areas ofManipur have been exempted. The problems
of institutional overlap in such areas are thus further compounded by the formation of
these councils. There are three authorities operating in parallel in these areas, namely, the
Council, the State departmental system and the Panchayati Raj system. These issues must
be urgently solved so that there is only one single authority. The Committee is of the view
that the Constitutional pattern will need to be respected and Panchayati Raj be strengthened
in these areas, rather than to create councils on the basis of ethnic identity alone, without
any geographical jurisdiction. Such bodies are inherently incapable of functioning as local
self governments and at best, can function as group focused development authorities, say,
in the same manner as SC and Tribal and OBC Development Corporations."
The Commission also examined this issue in its Report on Capacity Building for
Conflict Resolution (seventh Report paragraph 12.6.3.4.3). It again reiterates its earlier
recommendations.
Arunanchal Pradesh
Although Arunachal Pradesh has not witnessed home-grown insurgency, some of its districts
are presently affected by insurgency from neighbouring Nagaland as well as the demand
for NAGALIM from some insurgent groups. This has disrupted the historical tranquility
and development in these districts. The priority, therefore, needs to be on the restoration
of peace, lest the virus spread.
The tribal societies in Arunachal Pradesh are egalitarian. However, during the last 50
years inequalities have emerged initially because of the uneven spread of education and
unemployment. These inequalities were held in check by the system of community ownership
of land. However, there are now signs of the weakening of this tradition particularly
because community owned land is not bankable collateral. The Usha Thorat Committee
constituted by the Reserve Bank of India on Financial Sector Plan for NER observed that,
"for larger value of loans the banks are availing sufficient deposit receipt/grantee from the
third party. The transfer of properties Act is not applicabvle in the State and as a result
equitable mortgage can not be created. The banks are facing problem for financing high
value proposals for want of security." This needs to be carefully handled in association with
banks and all stake holders in the land.
The traditional system of dispute settlement both for civil and criminal cases known as
the 'Kebang system' has weakened with the introduction of the Panchayati Raj System
and the gradual expansion of the formal judicial system. Replacement of this system based
on a negotiated system of disputes, focusing on satisfaction to the victims, by a system
. I

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
of adjudicated settlement of disputes is inevitable. However, the co- existence of the two
systems during the period of transition requires careful consideration and decision. The
Ministry of Home Affairs would need to examine Regulation 1 of 1945.
On its constitution Arunachal Pradesh had five districts. It now has 15 districts. Reportedly
some staff from Circle Offices in remote areas has been adjusted in the district headquarters
consequently weakening the administrative set up in the Circle Offices. In view ofA runachal
Pradesh's border with Tibet and a history of Chinese incursions, it is imperative that the
focus on adequate administrative presence in remote border areas is not weakened.
Manipur
Manipur was a princely State that merged with the Indian Union in 1948 after some initial
reluctance on the part of the then Maharaja. A peculiar feature of the State is that out of
its total geographical area only 250/0 is in the valleys, which is home to around 700/0 of the
total population (overwhelmingly non-tribal) while the hill areas are inhabited by various
tribal communities belonging to Naga, Mizo and Kuki-Chin groups. The outbreak of
insurgency in the Naga Hills in the 1950s affected Naga inhabited Northern, Eastern and
Western Hills of the State too. Similarly, eruption of violence in Mizo Hills in the 1960s
caused disturbances in the Southern hills dominated by kindred tribes. The Valley inhabited
largely by the Meitei community, too, has been the scene of insurgency caused by local
armed groups from the 1970s. "Integrity" of the State has been a major issue as there is a
demand from certain Naga groups for merger of areas dominated by them in the Greater
Nagaland. In short, the State has remained in the midst of conflict and violence for long.
PRIs in the Valley Areas
In the valley areas, Panchayati Raj institutions have been constituted as envisaged by the
73rd Constitutional amendments. Elections are being held regularly by the State Election
Commission. PRIs have been involved in the implementation of poverty alleviation
programmes. However, they have not been given control over the DRDAs.
The Commission considered the issue of District and Village level Councils in Manipur
while examining modes of conflicts in the North East and observed that;
'In Manipur, the situation in the hill areas is a cause for concern. While the valley districts
are covered under the Seventy-third Amendment, hill areas are in the exempted category.
Six statutory autonomous Hill District Councils consisting of elected members with a
right ofp articipation by the legislators from the district fonctioned till 1990 when the

State and District Administration
next elections were due. Elections since then have not been possible as there has been a
demand from a significant section oft ribal population for bringing these areas under the
Sixth Schedule. The demand is strongly opposed by the valley areas on the ground that
it would lead to dismemberment oft he State. In the absence oft hese Councils) grassroots
level services like primary education) veterinary care and local arts and crafts have been
adversely affected and a forum for ventilating local problems has also been dispensed
with. It appears that after hardening of attitudes on both sides) not much efforts have
been made to break the stalemate. Manipur continues to be the only State where elected
village councils have not so for been set up while the village authorities involved with
regulation of village affairs are largely a body of traditional village principals. In the
absence of representative grassroots level bodies) selection of beneficiaries and monitoring
ofp overty alleviation schemes and similar interventions has suffered considerably. While
much greater efforts are required to build consensus on the issue ofD istrict Councils in the
State) urgent action is needed to bring in suitable legislation to introduce elected village
self-governance in the hill areas oft he State)~
The Commission recommended:-
((While continuous and vigorous measures are needed to bring about a consensus between
various sections ofs ociety in Manipur about revival oft he Hill Districts Councils) steps
may be urgently taken to bring in suitable legislation to introduce elected village level
bodies in the hill areas oft hat State. ))
The Commission once again reiterates this view. It believes the stalemate with regard to the
non functional District Councils is clearly prejudicial to the development of hill districts of
Manipur. While sincere, proactive measures are necessary to bring about a consensus among
the various sections of society about the revival of these long defunct bodies, there is no
reason why a beginning to introduce elements of accountable village level self governance
should be delayed. Suitable incentives could be provided to the State for initiating legislative
measures to usher in a system of village level democratization having regard to the local
circumstances. Once the District Councils are revived, it will be imperative to devolve a major
domain of developmental activities to them along with transfer of funds and functionaries.
The local functionaries of the field offices ~f the State governments and the parallel bodies
which are currently handing these activities at the district level will also need to be placed
at the disposal of the District Councils.
As regards strengthening and empowering the PRIs, the Commission would like to reiterate
its recommendations made in its Report on "Local Governance" (sixth Report).

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Issues ofP ersonnel Management in Manipur
The Commission during its visit to Manipur was apprised of the large scale demoralization
prevailing among the government staff at all levels. It was because of threats of extortion and
insurgency which had created an extremely troubled law and order situation throughout
the State. As a result, staff posted in remote hill districts do not join their place of postings
resulting in serious dislocation of public services. Schools were without teachers and
health care centres without para-medical staff. This situation has also led to administrative
aberrations like deployment of employees in urban centres far in excess of sanctioned posts.
In a bid to redress, the situation, Government of Manipur took a number of innovative
steps. These included:-
(1) Computerisation of a Personnel Information Systems (CPIS) under which a
data base was created of:
• All sanctioned posts in each office
• All regular government employees in each office
(2) It also generated a Unique Employee Identification Number (EIN) and it was
ensured that salary would be paid to only those staff who had an EIN.
(3) The CPIS was regularly up-dated in respect of each promotion, transfer, retirement
and recruitment.
The impact of this important measure included:-
1. Detection of 6311 ghost / fake employees (i.e. 10% of State's total man
power)
ii. Rs 80 crores saved per year in salary payments
iii. It stopped back-door/unauthorized appointments
iv. Re-deployment of staff in oudyinglremote hill offices
v. Clear information to each HOD about man power deployment
vi. Strong public appreciation
Another effective and noteworthy initiative on the part of the Manipur Government was the
passing of the Manipur Public Servant Liability (MPSPL) Act in support of the CPIS and

State and District Administration
to check corruption. It provided "for personal liability oft he public servants ofM anipur for
creation ofu nauthorized liability through irregular actions in form ofa ppointment or engagement
ofp ersons, award of works, supply orders, payment of bills, signing and execution ofc ontracts,
providing grants, benefits, compensation, and such other acts in the name of Government or
its agencies and recovery ofs uch amounts from the personal incomes including salary and other
entitlements oft he Public Servants responsible for creation ofs uch liabilities" .
The initial resistance to these initiatives was overcome because of extensive meetings and
interactions. Prima-facie, as per reports, there has been perceptible improvements both in
the presence of staff in remote locations as well as in governance in general because of these
steps. But, the challenge is to ensure that they are sustained.
Special powers to the Governor ofM anipur under Article 371
Currently Manipur is the most severly affected State in the region in terms of increase in
the number of cases of extortion and insurgency, etc. There have been instances when the
elected governments failed to take decisive action at critical moments, often leading to
complete breakdown of law and order and large scale disturbances in the State. Also, the
process of political reconciliation to resolve complex situations has considerably weakened.
Under these circumstances, there is need for the Union Government to consider giving
special responsibilities to the Governor of Manipur to deal adequately and effectively with
such situations. The Governors ofNagaland (Article 371A) and Arunahal Pradesh (Article
371H) have been given special responsibility under the Constitution for maintenance
of law and order in these States because of the strategic location and the long history of
insurgency and extremism in this region. In view of the problems of Manipur as stated
above, the Commission is of the view that similar powers may also be given to the Governor
of Manipur. Presently, under the provisions of Article 371 C, the Governor of Manipur is
entrusted only with the responsibility of submitting an annual report to the President on
the administration of hill areas of the State. He should also be assigned special responsibility
with regard to maintenance of law and order on the pattern of Article 371A and 371H.
This could be done by appropriate redrafting of the existing Article 371 C.
The Commission feels that by incorporating this provision in the Constitution, the Governor
of Manipur will be in a position to playa more proactive role in case of breakdown of law
and order and large scale disturbances in the State when there is reluctance or failure on the
part of the elected government to take timely measures to deal with such situation.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Meghalaya
StatUs ofL ocal Decentralization
Meghalaya is the only State in the North-East Region where the Sixth Schedule provisions
cover the entire territory except the so called "European Wards" of Shillong city.
Considering the fact that the geographic jurisdiction of the Councils taken together and
that of the State Government is co-terminus, it is not surprising that the additional powers
conferred on the Autonomous Councils in other States under the Schedule have not been
extended to the Councils in Meghalaya which exercise the 'pristine' powers of Paragraph
3 and 4 of the Schedule viz. jurisdiction over land, water and customs and administration
of justice. There is growing discomfort between the State Government and the Councils
in this regard, as these Councils are amongst the oldest in the Region and were recognized
when the constitution was framed.
Issues Concerning Autonomous District Councils
The Autonomous District Councils in Meghalaya have not been able to function effectively
for many reasons. It has been a common finding of several Commissions and Committees
which have examined the functioning of Autonomous Councils that there is considerable
disaffection between the State Government and the Councils. While the Councils believe
that they have a pre-eminent position in local governance, both on account of tradition and
the fact that they draw their strength from the Sixth Schedule, the Meghalaya Government's
attitude seems to be that these councils should stick to their traditional role, which is to
protect tribal culture, land and identity from being overwhelmed by the culture of the
plains. The State Government feels the Councils do not have much of a role to play in
developmental activities. At the district level, the only connection between the development
administration and the District Council exists through the Chief Executive Member (CEM)
who happens to be a member of the DRDA governing body.
The Commission is of the view that as in the case of Panchayati Raj, there is a need for
separation between the State Government and District Councils through a process of
activity mapping. There should be clear demarcation of jurisdiction between the State
Government and the District Councils ..T he links between the District Councils and the
State Government should be effectively maintained. The State Government should hand
over all subjects and departments that pertain to the domain of District Councils to them.
The Union Government would also need to take similar action with regard to Centrally
Sponsored Schemes being implemented in these areas. As regards financial resources,

State and District Administration
from the interaction that the Commission had with the Councils of Meghalaya, it believes
that the grants received from the State Government and their own revenues together are
insufficient to do full justice to their financial needs. Therefore, the allocation of funds to
the District Councils should be based on normative and transparent considerations. Also
the fiscal transfer system operating between the State Government and the District Councils
needs to be systematized. Funds for the District Councils should be budgeted for in detail
and allocations should be handed over to the District Councils in two instalments. At the
same time the Councils should take immediate action for improving their own revenues.
It is equally important to improve internal administration and financial management
capabilities of these autonomous councils in order to convert them into effective self
government institutions.
Elected Village Councils
There is growing concern in the State about the need to involve rural communities in
development programmes. A beginning has been made through 'pilot- testing' of an
innovative approach in the National Rural En1ployment Guarantee Scheme in West and
South Garo Hill Districts. This innovation is based on the model used for implementing
the IFAD (International Fund for Agriculture and Development) sponsored project,
"North Eastern Region Community Resource Management Project for Upland Areas
(NERCORMP). This project seeks to improve the livelihood of vulnerable groups through
improved management of the local resource base in selected areas. The project has a
hierarchy of groups like the village level Natural Resource Management Groups (NaRMG)
which function like the Gram Sabhas. A given number of such groups form a 'duster';
the 'dusters' in a District constitute the Community Resource Management Society. The
'duster' and 'community' level bodies consist of elected representatives of village level bodies,
representatives ofNGOs and Government officials.
The adaptations made by the State Government in the above model involve setting up a
Village Employment Committee (VEC). The VEC has three members-two of them elected,
one male and one female. The third member is the traditional village chief The electorate
consists of one adult male and female from each household. One of the elected member
acts as the Secretary. The VEC is responsible for preparing schemes to be undertaken and
monitors the implementation. Above the VEC there is Area Executive Committee (AEC).
'Area' comprises villages within a radius of 3.5 KMs. AEC consists of the village head and
another member of the VEC subject to the condition that at least thirty percent members
are to be females. The AEC issues Employment Cards under the NREGS. The AEC is to
be headed by a local chief

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
This experiment has the merit of bringing in an element of participation, including gender
representation while retaining the traditional source of authority. The arrangement will,
however, become meaningful only when the number of members of the VEC is raised (say
to ten) and the AEC is provided a linkage with the Block and District level Committees. It
will need some modification in its application to Khasi areas as the institution of "Darbar"
in such areas may require some adjustment in the concept of VEC- "Darbars" do not
necessarily coincide with village boundaries.
In its seventh Report, it was recommended by the Commission that,
"Government ofMeghalaya may take steps for extension oft he experiment ofe lected village
committees in the Garo Hills for implementation oft he National Employment Guarantee
Act throughout the State for implementation ofa ll rural development programmes".
The Commission reiterates the above recommendations. Further, in line with its thinking
with regard to constitution of representative bodies at the village level in the Sixth Schedule
Areas of .l\ssam, and the hill areas of Manipur, the Commission is of the view that in the
long run, directly elected village level representative bodies will need to be constituted and
properly empowered in Autonomous Hill Council areas of Meghalaya as well.
Mizoram
At the commencement of the Constitution, Mizoram was a District in Assam, known as
Lushai Hills and was included in the Sixth Schedule. Renamed as Mizo Hills in 1954,
the area experienced severe famines in the late 195 Os and early 1960s which led to serious
turmoil and insurgency spearheaded by the Mizo National Front (MNF). The District was
separated from Assam and raised first to the status of a Union Territory in 1972 and then to
full Statehood in 1987. Following an accord with the MNF in 1986 peace and tranquility
has been restored in Mizoram. The State has made rapid strides and has emerged with the
highest literacy in the country. Despite its small population and limited territory, it has
considerable ethnic diversity. With the conferment of the status of Union Territory the
Mizo Hill District Council was dissolved and now the State has three autonomous district
councils catering to three non Mizo minority tribes- Mara, Lai and Chakma.
A closer look at the present administrative arrangements in Mizoram reveals that there are
two parallel administrative hierarchies functioning within the district, one headed by the
Council, which has potentially wide executive and development functions and the other
headed and coordinated by the Deputy Commissioner, who operates through separate
agencies such as the DRDA and State level line department officers posted in the district.

State and District Administration
While Councils existed even prior to the Constitutional amendment, unlike Panchayats in
other parts of the country, their position and status has weakened and their powers diffused
over time. The Ramachandran Committee observed that "in Mizoram, these councils at first
glance are over-structured, over-staffed and with patchy empowerment - while they have
unbridled unaccountable freedom in one area, they have none in others. The problems of
the Councils are also compounded by the fact that they covered very small populations of
ethnic groups, thereby reducing the scope and scale of their operations."
The Committee also noted that "the problem was not only one of development but is also
political. There are strong ethnic feelings, between tribal communities in the State, which
undermines the spirit of collaboration and cooperation required between different levels
of government for effective functioning. The Mizoram Assembly has passed resolutions for
abolition of Councils and on the other hand the Councils have been demanding separate
UT status and direct funding. There is a need for both the Government and the Councils
to realize that to accelerate development; they will need to work as partners, as part of a
seamless web and not as rivals. Many individuals within either system undertake good
work and no institution can be condemned wholesale for the mistakes of some within it.
The methods of working need to be so rearranged so that everybody can work together
and achieve something."
In order to resolve the conflicts explained above, the following steps could be useful:-
1. Effective devolution of powers to the District Councils
ii. Internal reforms and capacity building within the District Councils
111. Merger of DRDA with the District Council
The above issues have been considered by the Commission earlier in this Chapter as common
issues relevant to all the Sixth Schedule States of the North East and separately in case of
Assam and Meghalaya. As recommended therein, the State must undertake comprehensive
activity mapping with regard to the matters which can be transferred to the autonomous
councils. This process should cover all aspects of the subjects viz planning, budgeting and
provisioning of finances. This will necessitate full transfer of all departments and bodies
relating to these activities to the control of the Councils and merger of parallel institutions
[such as the District Rural Development Agency DRDAJ related to these transferred matters
and departments The State Government should set-up a task force to complete this work
within one year. The Union Government will also need to take similar action with regard
to Centrally Sponsored Schemes being implemented in these areas.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
The Commission would further like to suggest that a coordinating committee, either
within the State Planning Board, or under the Chief Secretary, be constituted to monitor
the reforms, and settle any issues that might arise in the process. The CEMs of all the
three Councils and the Deputy Commissioners of the District concerned may be made
members of this Coordination Committee. Representation may also be given to NGOs,
associations of Women and the youth and selected Chairpersons of Village Councils, in
the Committee.
Nagaland
The Nagas are a group of tribes with their own languages, social customs, folklore and
territories who were clubbed together for administrative purposes by the ruling powers
at different points of the history of the region. Many Naga areas were grouped in a single
Naga Hills District in 1866 to bring these areas under direct British rule to safeguard tea
plantations. The district did not, however, include many areas like the Northern and Eastern
parts of Manipur and tracts, once known as "Naga tribal areas" - one of the 'agencies' of
NEFA. The Sixth Schedule of the Constitution was initially conceived as an arrangement
to meet the political aspirations of the people of this District - an arrangement that could
not be implemented as it fel far short of the Naga demand for self rule. Violent insurgency
had broken out in the early 1950s for an 'independent Nagaland' not only in the Naga Hills
District but also in areas dominated by the Nagas in Manipur and NEFA. The District was
initially upgraded as the "Naga-Tuensang Administrative Area" in 1957 with the merger of
Tuensang frontier tract ofNEFA and with an "Area Council" -a nominated body consisting
of traditional opinion leaders of the constituent tribes. Disturbances, however, continued
unabated even after the emergence of the State. It is now widely recognized that recourse to
violence by various ethnic groups in the North East at different points of time was largely
an 'inspiration' from Naga insurgency.
Hopes of lasting peace raised by the ShillongAccord with the Naga groups in 1975 proved
short-lived as elements opposed to the Accord regrouped as the National Socialist Council
of Nagaland (NSCN) and the cycle of violence continued. In the last few years, however,
there has been an improvement in the situation with a 'cease fire' between major elements
within the NSCN and the Union Government.
1he Communitization Experiment
I~ order to decentralize governance, the Nagaland Government has made innovative use
of the "social capital" prevailing in that State in Naga Society. It has enacted the Nagaland
Communitization of Public Services and Institutions Act 2002 commonly called the

State and District Administration
'Communitization Act'. The intention is to improve the quality of various services being
provided by the Government to the citizens by involving the community and by transferring
control over the schemes/services to the actual beneficiaries. The legislation provides for the
State Government to delegate its functions, including control over the personnel, involved
with the 'delegated services' to such authorities. Village Authorities can be invested with
the functions of local authorities under the Act. This step has made a very positive impact
on the functioning of many of the development programmes and brought an overall
improvement in the quality and speed of services and even more important, in making the
communities realize that they can make a positive contribution to their own development.
An important result of the communitisation experiment is that the benefits of this initiative
have spread to the urban areas where the traditional patterns of tribe specific community
organization are not very significant. It may be noted that the model is analogous to the
scheme envisaged in Article 243G (read with the Eleventh Schedule) of the Constitution
which calls for a state legislation to transfer functions to the PRIs.
The Communitization Experiment has brought all round improvement in a large number of
projects/ schemes which deal with education, water supply, roads, forests, powers, health and
sanitation and welfare schemes in the entire state. It has empowered people and increased
efficacy and transparency in governance.
Sikkim
At the commencement of the Constitution, Sikkim was regarded as a princely state which,
unlike similar other States was a 'protectorate'. Sikkim's governance as a protectorate was
based on a treaty whereby a measure of internal autonomy under its Maharaja (Chogyal)
subject to the overarching responsibility of the Government of India to safeguard the
protectorate and conduct its foreign relations. Increasing public aspirations for a legal
framework permitting peoples' participation in governance led to a popular uprising which
culminated in introduction of a measure of democracy at the instance of the Government
of India. The newly elected Assembly and the Chogyal could not come to a consensus
on a popular government gave rise to further agitation demanding formal merger of the
'protectorate' as a State of the Indian Union. This resulted in the thirty-sixth Constitutional
amendment in 1975 which introduced Article- 371F in the Constitution. This Article,
apart from declaring Sikkim as a part of the Indian Union makes some special provisions
including vesting of discretionary powers on the Governor (subject to any orders of the
President) to facilitate " peace and for an equitable arrangement for ensuring the social and
economic advancement of different sections of the population". Since its merger with the
Indian Union, Sikkim has made very strong progress on all fronts.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Status ofL ocal Decentralization
Sikkim has a long history ofPanchayati Raj institutions. Even prior to its merger, a law was
enacted by the Chogyal in 1965 to provide for elected, but non partisan, village Panchayats
primarily for local disputes resolution. The seventy-third amendment applies to the State;
soon after its coming into force, the Sikkim Panchayati Raj Act 1993 was enacted which
provides for elected Gram Panchayats (GPs) and Zila Panchayats (ZPs). Gram Sabhas in the
State are referred as Panchayat wards- six to eight wards constitute a Gp. Sikkim is one of
the first States to have transferred Primary and Secondary Education to Panchayati bodies.
A number of steps have recently been initiated to further strengthen the role ofPanchayats.
Some of the more important of these are;
• Establishment of 'Gram Planning Forum' for each Panchayat to make the 'GP'
the unit of local planning.
• Setting up District Technical Support Committee to assist Zila Panchayats in
drawing up District Plans.
• Initiation of a system of specifically reflecting earmarking of funds for schemes
to be taken up by Panchayats in the State budget.
The State does not have any Municipal body- a Municipal Corporation was established
for the city of Gangtok in 1975, the legislation was, however, repealed in 1985 and urban
governance is now directly looked after by the governments.
Personnel position
Sikkim is the smallest State of the country with a population of 5,40,493 (2001 census)
and an area of 7096 sq.km. The State has four districts with headquarters at Gangtok,
Mangan, Namchi and Gyalshing.
Considering the population and area ofSikkim, its cadre strength for all the three All India
Service officers seems to be on high. The C01!lmission is of the view that there is need for
its rationalization, in the interest of both good governance and the morale of the officers
in accordance with actual requirements, including its operational requirements.
Tripura
Before Independence, Tripura was a princely State ruled by Maharajas of the Manikya
dynasty. The Regent Maharani ofTripura signed an instrument of merger with the Indian
I _

State and District Administration
Union on September 9, 1947. Tripura became a Union Territory without legislature with
effect from November 1, 1956. However, a legislature was installed in July 1, 1963. Tripura
attained Statehood on January 21, 1972.
Status ofL ocal Decentralization
Alienation of land belonging to tribals emerged as a major problem with independence
and the merger of princely Tripura with the Indian Union. The Tripura Tribal Areas
Autonomous District Council (TTAADC) was established as an independent council
administering the tribal areas within the State through the TTAADC Act 1979 passed by
the Indian parliament after a series of democratic movements launched by the tribal people
ofTripura. The Council was set up on 18, January, 1982. Following the 49th amendment
of the Constitution of India, the TTAADC was brought under the provisions of the Sixth
Schedule of the Constitution with effect from 1 April, 1985. The principal objective of setting
up the TTAADC is to empower the tribal people to govern themselves, bring all round
development to them and protect and preserve their culture, customs and traditions.
Prior to the establishment of the District Council- initially by a State legislation under
the Fifth Schedule- villages included in its jurisdiction had Panchayats like the rest of the
State. Following the establishment of the Council, Tripura Panchayat Raj Act ceased to
operate in that area and there was no village level body- elected or otherwise. In 2006, the
State Government decided to hold elections to the Village Councils by treating them on
par with village Panchayats in other parts of the State taking the view that nothing in Sixth
Schedule precludes such a course of action. The Autonomous Council is, however, yet to
transfer any functions to these newly established Councils. This step has important policy
implications.
The rest of the State has a very robust three tier Panchayati structure as provided under
the seventy-third amendment. Elections to these bodies are conducted by the State
Election Commission. These bodies are responsible for implementation of development
programmes.
Issues and Recommendations
1. Decentralised Planning
Tripura has established system of decentralised planning in the form of the Gramodaya and
Nagrodaya initiatives. The State plan is prepared through consolidation of the local plans
prepared with the help of these initiatives. The district plan is formed by consolidating and
amalgamating the village and block level plans pertaining to both the Sixth Schedule Areas
11

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
and the areas covered under PRIs. However, the District Planning Committees (DPCs)
have not been formed under the provisions of Article 243ZD of the Constitution. The
Commission is of the ,:"iew that there is need to constitute the DPCs with the representatives
from both the TTADC and the District Administration as all the districts in Tripura
comprised of both TTADC and Part IX areas. The TTADC should also be involved in the
planning process at State level.
2. Role clarity between various levels of Governance
As suggested in case of other States, there is a need for unambiguous activity mapping
assigning the functions of various levels operating within the system such as the District
Council, Block level formations and Village Councils. The Expert Committee on
Decentralised Planning in the Sixth Schedule Areas observed that "the system of dividing
the TTAADC into Zones and sub-Zones, overlaps with the Blocks, Tehsils and the Block
. Advisory Committees. In fact, having the Block Advisory Commttees chaired by MLAs and
the Z6ne and sub-Zone advisory bodies headed by elected representatives of the TTAADC
is a redpe for conflict and lack of role clarity.
While endorsing the observation of the Expert Committee, the Commission is of the
view that in order to avoid conflict and overlapping jurisdictions, it may be ensured that
there is only one intermediate structure between the village and the district bodies of the
TTAADC. In the meantime, the State Government should try to evolve a mechanism for
coordination between the block level committees and zones/sub-zones.
MANAGING STATE FINANCES
Apart from implementing the programmes and schemes undertaken through its own
budget, a State plays a key role in implementing various Centrally Sponsored and Central
Sector Schemes.
Appropriate selection of programmes and projects, prudent financial planning, expenditure
methodology and concurrent and post expenditure scrutiny are the vital elements which
decide how the finances of the Government are being utilized and managed.
The core principles that should form the foundation of a sound Public Finance Management
System such as adopting prudent economic assumptions, aligning annual budgets with
the medium term plan, relaxing central input controls, adoption of top-down budgeting
principles, focusing on value for money and introducing transparency and simplicity in
various procedures have already been referred to.

State and District Administration
With the above broad outlines, the following issues are of considerable significance in
sustainable financial administration of the State Governments.
1. Financial Delegation and Operational Flexibility
2. Avoiding Fiscal Profligacy
3. Expenditure Management
(a) need to review relevance and utility of continuing programmes and
schemes
(b) ensuring expenditure uniformity over the year
4. Prudent Budget formulation
- Realistic estimates and assumptions for budget preparation
- Avoiding inaccurate and incomplete disclosure of financial situation
Public consultation in budget formulation
Issue of supplementary demands
Off budget and contingent liabilities
Multi-year budgeting
5. Revenue forecast and need for a tax research unit
6. Mechanism for internal control
7. External audit
1. Financial Delegation and Operational Flexibility - the [FA system
In order to ensure, financial delegation and operational flexibility in the functioning of
various Ministries/Departments, the Union Government introduced the scheme of posting
senior officers as Integrated Financial Advisers in Ministries/Departments. In consultation
with the Secretary of the concerned department, the IFA is empowered to take budgetary
and financial decisions of considerable financial value. The system has been of considerable
use to the Union Ministries/Departments in planning, programming and budgeting. The

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
scheme has worked well in the Government of India. The Commission is of the view that
the experience of the Union Government with regard to IFA should motivate them to
introduce/strengthen a similar system of the IFA in the State administration too.
2. Avoiding Fiscal Profligacy
In spite of detailed instructions and guidelines in budget manuals, projects and schemes
continue being announced on an ad-hoc basis, often before elections or during visits of
high-level functionaries. Such announcements involving huge funds seriously distort plan
allocations and disturb the faithful implementation of schemes already approved under the
budget. The Commission is of the view that the selection of programmes and projects should
be solely on considerations of objectivity and sustainability. The State Governments need
to take steps to ensure that projects are included in the budget only after well considered
deliberations and processes. The practice of announcing projects and schemes on an ad-hoc
basis needs to be abandoned.
3. Expenditure Management
In most of the States, the expenditure pattern is highly skewed. The first two quarters of the
financial year are mostly spent in preparing detailed project reports and in getting sanctions.
The result is that the bulk of expenditure takes place in the later part, particularly in the
last quarter of the year. The Government of India has tried to overcome this problem by
introducing the Monthly Expenditure Plan (MEP). Some of the States too have taken similar
steps. The Commission is of the view that all the States should take positive measures to
improve the expenditure scenario. (a) detailed project reports of schemes should be finalized
in the preceding year and (b) the financial sanctions should be given to the departments
during the first two months of the current financial year.
Need to review relevance and utility ofc ontinuing programmes/schemes
The Commission is of the view that there is need for a zero-based review of programmes
and schemes which are more than five years old and which involve large sums of public
money. (Say over 50 crores)
4. Prudent Budget formulation
Realistic estimates and assumptions for budget preparation
There is need to have economic assumptions which are prudent and realistic in order to
formulate budget estimates which are accurate and not overly optimistic. At the end of
every financial year, the gap between the estimates and the actuals should be analysed so

State and District Administration
that the underlying economic assumptions could be suitably calibrated for the future.
Public Consultation
Till some years ago, Budget making was a secret process. In absence of appropriate feed
back, the budget makers often worked in isolation. Though the Union Government initiated
a system of having pre-budget consultations with industry associations and think tanks
some years ago, most of the State Governments have not yet taken steps to open up on
this issue. The Commission is of the view that such interactive processes between the State
Government and the people would lift the veil of secrecy from "Budget Making". It will
be a major step towards transparency and objectivity in budget formulation. It also needs
to be emphasized that such consultations would be effective and meaningful only when
(a) citizens have access to information and (b) effective steps are taken to educate citizens
and leaders of society on budget making and its implications.
Multi-year Budgeting
The Commission is of the view that the State Governments should shift to multi-year
budgeting and give the estimates of revenue and expenditure for a period of four years in
addition to the year which the budget pertains. This should be done on a roll-on basis. This
will enable better estimation of the fund requirements of on-going schemes, programmes
and projects. It will also ensure realistic budgeting.
Medium Term Fiscal Plan
In this context, preparation of a Medium Term Fiscal Plan (MTFP) will be of relevance.
MTFP is a statement of the government's, medium-term fiscal objectives which provides
projection of key financial variables for the current fiscal together with a block of next
three to four years. Each MTFP also reports performance against targets. The MTFP serves
two purposes. First, it helps to put annual budget formulation within the medium-term
context. Second, it serves as a communication channel to the people, of government's fiscal
intentions and strategy. The Commission believes that the States should follow the practice
of preparation and implementation of the MTFP.
Off-Budget and contingent liabilities
The budget and the financial statements of the State Government often do not reflect the
complete picture. For example, government's contingent liabilities owing to the guarantees
furnished by it against the borrowings by various parastatals are not captured in the budget
or the financial statements.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
The Commission agrees with the view that offbudget borrowings are bound to have an
adverse impact on State finances in the long run. --Every State Government must set a limit
upto which it can expose itself to the guarantees. The Commission realizes that in some
situations, such guarantees may be inevitable. But, the State Governments need to adopt
caution and diligence with regard to viability of such projects. They need to be assessed
and evaluated comprehensively.
Maintenance ofA ssets
Very often, not only do projects remain incomplete due to lack of funds, even when they
are completed, their maintenance and utilization suffers due to poor provisioning of
funds. It would be stating the obvious to say that whole idea of creating an asset is to use it
productively. This often, does not happen in practice because of either lack of maintenance
or some associated facility such as an operator or place has not been provided. This is due to
the belief that non-plan expenditure is essentially unproductive. While funds are generally
available for a plan scheme any non-plan expenditure is viewed with suspicion. It is felt that
one way of overcoming this in built prejudice against non-plan expenditure is to provide
for maintenance of the asset in the capital value of the asset and ensure its maintenance for
at least for five years after it is acquired. For example the government can sign an annual
maintenance contract (AMC) with the vendor at the time of purchase itself so as to avoid
seeking funds for its maintenance in subsequent years under non-plan expenditure.
This action needs to go hand in hand with recovery of adequate user <;:harges.
5. Revenue forecast and needf or a tax research unit
Estimates of revenue in the budget are based more on optimism and hope (and sometimes
as balancing entries to reduce the gap in resources) than on any systematic attempt at
assessing the likely revenue. The Commission is of the view that there should be a dedicated
cell within the Finance Department in every State to provide input on the revenue forecast
with the reasons thereof This would add value to budget formulation exercise.
6. Mechanism for internal control
It is necessary to develop a strategic view of internal audit to move beyond the financial
regularity and compliance audit to exert a wider role. In the light of this strategic view, the
scope and role of internal audit needs to be redefined. The organization structure of the
internal audit should be recast with the internal audit directly reporting to the head of the
organization followed up by proper staffing and capacity building of internal audit units.

State and District Administration
The Commission has suggested constitution of audit committees in respect of Government
of India. The same could be considered by the State Governments too.
7. External audit
The Public Accounts Committees in some States have a practice of examining all paragraphs
and performance audit reports included in the CAG's Audit Reports, while others have
adopted the selective approach. In the former case, due to the volume of work involved,
the Reports of the CAG are sometimes not discussed for years together, often upto 10-15
years and the arrears keep mounting.
To overcome the situation, the Legislative Committees may like to adopt a time frame within
which they would complete examination of audit reports and submit their reports to the
Legislature. The State Governments may, therefore, specify a time frame for the Departments
for necessary follow up action on the recommendations of Audit and forwarding of the
ATN after incorporating such action to Audit for vetting before their final submission to
the State PAC/ copu. It is also necessary to ensure that all Departments adhere to the
prescribed time limits.
Projectisation and Appraisal
A common practice in the State Governments is to understate the magnitude of a project
so as to get it somehow included in the plan basket. Then, as the years go by, the true
financial implications emerge.
The Commission believes that in many cases, it is possible for the Government to deploy
public funds as a sound business proposition, with inbuilt financial closure. Various
departments of the States need to develop/enhance their project formulation and appraisal
capacity.

SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
RIGHT TO INFORMATION
- Master Key to Good Governance
1. The Official Secrets Act (Para 2.2.12) :
a. The Official Secrets Act, 1923 should be repealed, and substituted by a
chapter in the National Security Act, containing provisions relating to
official secrets.
b. The equivalent of the existing Section 5, in the new law may be on the lines
recommended by the Shourie Committee as quoted below:
" 5(1) If any person, having in his possession or control any official secret
which has come into his possession or control by virtue of:-
b 1. his holding or having held an office with or under government, or
b2. a contract with the government, or
b3. it being entrusted to him in confidence by another person holding
or having held an office under or with the government, or in any
other manner,
i. communicates, without due authority such official secret to
another person or uses it for a purpose other than a purpose
for which he is permitted to use it under any law for the time
being in force; or
ii. fails to take reasonable care of, or so conducts himself as to
endanger the safety of the official secret; or
iii. wilfully fails to return the official secret when it is his duty to
return it,
shall be guilty of an offence under this section.
.. 5(2) · Any person voluntarily receiving any official secret knowing or
having reasonable ground to believe, at the time he receives it, that the
~
*1b.e Para numbers indicated in the Recommendations are as per the main Reports

Right to Information - Master Key to Good Governance
official secret is communicated in contravention of this Act, he shall be
guilty of an offence under this section.
5(3) A person guilty of an offence under this section shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with
fine or with both.
Explanation: For the purpose of this section, 'Official Secret' means any
information the disclosure of which is likely to prejudicially affect the
sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of State, friendly relations
with foreign states, economic, commercial, scientific and technological
matters relating to national security and includes: any secret code,
password, sketch plan, model, article, note or document in relation to a
prohibited place."
2. Governmental Privilege in Evidence (Para 2.3.8) :
a. Section 123 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 should be amended to read
as follows:
"123. (l)Subject to the provisions oft his section, no one shall be permitted
to give any evidence derived from official records which are exempt from
public disclosure under the RTIA ct, 2005.
(2) Where he withholds such permission, he shall make an affidavit
containing a statement to that effect and setting forth his reasons
therefor.
(3) Where such officer has withheld permission for the giving of such
evidence, the Court, after considering the affidavit or further
if
affidavit, and it so thinks fit, after examining such officer or, in
appropriate cases, the Minister, orally:
a) shall issue a summons for the production of the unpublished
if
official records concerned, such summons has not already
been issued;
b) shall inspect the records in chambers; and
c) shall determine the question whether the giving ofs uch evidence
would or would not be injurious to public interest, recording
its reasons therefor.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
(4) Where, under sub-section (3), the Court decides that the giving
of such evidence would not be injurious to public interest, the
provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply to such evidence.
Provided that in respect of information classified as Top Secret for
reasons of national security, only the High Court shall have the
power to order production of the records."
Section 124 of the Indian Evidence Act will become redundant on
account of the above and will have to be repealed.
Accordingly, the following will have to be inserted at the appropriate
place in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973:
')tny person aggrieved by the decision ofa ny Court subordinate to the High Court
rejecting a claim for privilege made under Section 123 of the Indian Evidence
Act, 1872 shall have a right to appeal to the High Court against such decision,
and such appeal may be filed notwithstanding the fact that the proceeding in
which the decision was pronounced by the Court is stillp ending. "
3. The Oath of Secrecy (Para 2.4.4):
a. As an affirmation of the importance of transparency in public affairs,
Ministers on assumption of office may take an oath of transparency along
with the oath of office and the requirement of administering the oath of
secrecy should be dispensed with. Articles 75(4) and 164 (3), and the
Third Schedule should be suitably amended.
b. Safeguard against disclosure of information against the national interest
may be provided through written undertaking by incorporation of a
clause in the national security law dealing with official secrets.
4. Exempted Organizations (Para 2.5.6) :
a. The Armed Forces should be included in the Second Schedule of the Act.
b. The Second Schedule of the Act may be reviewed periodically.
c. All organizations listed in the Second Schedule have to appoint PIOs.
Appeals against orders of PIO s should lie with CIC/SICs.
(This provision can be made by way of removal of difficulties under
Section 30)

Right to Information - Master Key to Good Governance
5. The Central Civil Services (Conduct) Rules (Para 3.1.4) :
a. Civil Services Rules of all States may be reworded on the following lines:
"Communication ofO fficial Information:
Every Government servant shall, in performance ofh is duties in goodf aith,
communicate to a member ofp ublic or any organisation full and accurate
information, which can be disclosed under the Right to Information Act,
2005.
Explanation - Nothing in this rule shall be construed as permitting
communication of classified information in an unauthorised manner or
for improper gains to a Government servant or others. "
6. The Manual of Office Procedure (Para 3.2.3) :
a. Para 116 of the Manual of Office Procedure needs to be reworded as
follows:
"Communication of Official Information: Every Government Servant
shall, in performance ofh is duties in goodf aith, communicate to a member
ofp ublic or any organization full and accurate information, which can be
disclosed under the Right to Information Act. (Nothing stated above shall
be construed as permitting communication ofc lassified information in an
unauthorized manner or for improper gains to a Government Servant or
others). "
b. Para 118 (1) should be deleted.
c. The State Governments may be advised to carry out similar amendments
in their Manuals, if such provisions exist therein.
7. Classification of Information (Para 4.1.8) :
a. The GOI should amend the Manual ofD epartmental Security Instructions
in the following manner:
i. Information Deserving C~assification (Para 3):
It would be advisable for each Ministry/Department to identify
the information which deserves to be given a security classification.
Ordinarily, only such information should be given a security

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
classification which would qualify for exemption from disclosure
under the Right to Information Act, 2005. The classification of
documents should be done as per the following guidelines:
SI.No. Section of the RTI Act to which Classification
information pertains
1. 8(1)(a) Top Secret
2. 8(I)(b) Confidential
3. 8(I)(c) Confidential
4. 8(I)(d) Secret
5. 8(I)(e) Confidential
6 .. 8(1)(0 Secret
7. 8(1)(g) Top Secret/Secret
8. 8(I)(h) Secret/Confidential
9. 8(1) (i) Confidential
10. 8(I)(j) Confidential/Restricted
11. 9 Confidential/Restricted
Explanation: The above mentioned classification should be generally
followed. It is quite possible that information may be covered by
more than one exemption; in that case the information should be
given the classification of the higher category. Also if it is felt by
the competent authority that circumstances of a case demand a
higher classification than what is indicated above, then the same
may be done by an authority, which is empowered to give such a
classification.
Provision should be made to include annual confidential reports of
officers and examination question papers and related matters in the
exemptions under the RTI Act. This may be done by way of removal
of difficulties under Section 30.
li. Upgrading and Downgrading (Para 2.3):
Documents once classified as "Top Secret" or "Secret", should

Right to Information - Master Key to Good Governance
remain so classified as long as required but not exceeding 30 years.
Documents classified as confidential and restricted should remain
so for a period not exceeding 10 years. However, the competent
classifying officer may, for reasons to be recorded in writing,
authorise continued classification beyond the period prescribed
above if information, the disclosure of which would cause damage
to national security or national interest. A recipient officer of
appropriate rank in a Ministry or Department may upgrade the
security classification of a document .r eceived from outside, but
this raised classification will be limited only to the Ministry or
Department. (S) He will, however, have no authority to downgrade
the security classification of a document received, without the
concurrence of the originator. Within the same Department,
an officer superior to the originator would have the authority to
downgrade or upgrade the classification.
iii. Officer authorised to accord the grading:
Top Secret Not below Joint Secretary
Secret Not below Deputy Secretary
Confidential Not below Under Secretary
The State Governments may authorise officers of equivalent rank to
accord the grading.
8. Building Institutions (Para 5.2.5):
a. Section 12 oft he Act may be amended to constitute the Selection Committee
of CIC with the Prime Minister, Leader of the Opposition and the Chief
Justice of India. Section 15 may be similarly amended to constitute the
Selection Committee at the State level with the Chief Minister, Leader of
the Opposition and the Chief Justice of the High Court.
b. The GOI should ensure the constitution of SICs in all States within 3
months.
c. The CI C should establish 4 regional offices of CI C with a Commissioner
heading each. Similarly regional offices of SICs should be established in
larger States.
d. At least half of the members of the Information Commissions should be

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
drawn from non civil services background. Such a provision may be made
in the Rules under the Act, by the Union Government, applicable to both
CIC and SICs.
9. Designating Information Officers and Appellate Authorities (Para 5.3.4):
(i) All Ministries/ Departments/Agencies/Offices with more than one PIO
have to designate a nodal Assistant Public Information Officer with
the authority to receive requests for information on behalf of all PIOs.
Such a provision should be incorporated in the Rules by appropriate
governments.
(ii) PIOs in Central Secretariats should be of the level of at least Deputy
Secretary /Director. In State Secretariats, officers of similar rank should
be notified as PIO s. In all subordinate agencies and departments officers
sufficiendy senior in rank and yet accessible to public may be designated
as PIOs.
(iii) All public authorities may be advised by the Government of India that
along with the Public Information Officers they should also designate the
appellate authority and publish both, together.
(iv) The designation and notification of Appellate Authorities for each public
authority may be made either under Rules or by invoking Section 30 of
the Act.
10. Organising Information and Recordkeeping (Para 5.4.11):
a. Suo motu disclosures should also be available in the form of printed,
priced publication in the official language, revised periodically (at least
once a year). Such a publication should be available for reference, free
of charge. In respect of electronic disclosures, NIC should provide a
single portal through which disclosures of all public authorities under
appropriate governments could be accessed, to facilitate easy availability
of information.
b. Public Records Offices should be established as an independent authority
in GOI and all States within 6 months by integrating and restructuring the
multiple agencies currendy involved in record keeping. This Office will
be a repository of technical and professional expertise in management of
public records. It will be responsible for supervision, monitoring, control
and inspection of record keeping in all public offices.

Right to Information - Master Key to Good Governance
c. Public Records Office would function under the overall supervision and
guidance of CIC/SIC.
d. As a one time measure, GOI should earmark 1 % of the funds of all
Flagship Programmes for a period of five years for updating records,
improving infrastructure, creating manuals and establishing the Public
Records Offices. (An amount not exceeding 25% of this should be utilized
for awareness generation).
e. As a one time measure, GO I may create a Land Records Modernisation
Fund for survey and updation of all land records. The quantum of
assistance for each State would be based on an assessment of the field
situation.
f. All organizations, which have jurisdiction over an area equal to or
exceeding a district, should be funded and required to complete the process
of digitization by the end of 2009. All sub-district level organizations
should complete this task by the end of 20 11. The controlling Ministriesl
Departments at Union and State level should lay down a detailed road
map for this purpose with well-defined milestones within 6 months, so
that this could be implemented as a priority item in the Eleventh Five Year
Plan.
11. Capacity Building and Awareness Generation (Para 5.5.5):
a. Training programmes should not be confined to merely PIOs and APIOs.
All government functionaries should be imparted at least one day training
on Right to Information within a year. These training programmes have
to be organized in a decentralized manner in every block. A cascading
model could be adopted with a batch of master trainers in each district.
b. In all general or specialized training programmes, of more than 3
days duration, a half-day module on Right to Information should be
compulsory.
c. Awareness campaigns should be entrusted to credible non profit
organizations at the State level. They should design a multi-media campaign
best suited to the needs, in the local language. The funds earmarked (as
mentioned in para 5.4.11.d) could be utilized for this purpose.
d. Appropriate governments should bring out guides and comprehensible
information material within the prescribed time.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
e. The CIC and the SICs may issue guidelines for the benefit of public
authorities and public officials in particular and public in general about
key concepts in the Act and approach to be taken in response to information
requests on the lines of the Awareness Guidance Series referred to above
(para 5.5.1).
12. Monitoring Mechanism (Para 5.6.4):
a. The CIC and the SICs may be entrusted with the task of monitoring
effective implementation of Right to Information Act in all public
authorities. (An appropriate provision could be made under Section 30
by way of removal of difficulties).
b. As a large number of Public Authorities exist at regional, state, district
and sub district level, a nodal officer should be identified wherever
necessary by the appropriate monitoring authority (CIC/SIC) to monitor
implementation of the Act.
c. Each public authority should be responsible for compliance of provisions
of the Act in its own office as well as that of the subordinate public
authorities.
d. A National Coordination Committee (NCC) may be set up under the
chairpersonship of the Chief Information Commissioner with the nodal
Union Ministry, the SICs and representatives of States as members. A
provision to this effect may be made under Section 30 of the Act by way
of removing difficulties. The National Coordination Committee would:
i. serve as a national platform for effective implementation of the
Act,
ii. document and disseminate best practices in India and elsewhere,
iii. monitor the creation and functioning of the national portal for
Right to Information,
iv. review the Rules and Executive Orders issued by the appropriate
governments under the Act,
v. carry out impact evaluation of the implementation of the Act and
vi. perform such other relevant functions as may be deemed
necessary.

Right to Information - Master Key to Good Governance
13. Facilitating Access (Para 6.2.7):
a. In addition to the existing modes of payment, appropriate governments
should amend the Rules to include payment through postal orders.
b. States may be required to frame Rules·r egarding application fee which
are in harmony with the Central Rules. It needs to be ensured that the fee
itself does not become a disincentive.
c. Appropriate governments may restructure the fees (including additional
fees) in multiples of Rs 5. {e.g. instead of prescribing a fee of Rs. 2 per
additional page it may be desirable to have a fee of Rs. 5 for every 3 pages
or part thereof}.
d. State Governments may issue appropriate stamps in suitable denomin ations
as a mode of payment of fees. Such stamps would be used for making
applications before public authorities coming within the purview of State
Governments.
e. As all the post offices in the country have already been authorized to
function as APIOs on behalf of Union Ministries/Departments, they may
also be authorized to collect the fees in cash and forward a receipt along
with the application.
14. Inventory of Public Authorities (Para 6.3.2):
a. At the Government of India level the Department of Personnel and
Training has been identified as the nodal department for implementation
of the RTI Act. This nodal department should have a complete list of all
Union Ministries/Departments which function as public authorities.
b. Each Union Ministry/Department should also have an exhaustive list of all
public authorities, which come within its purview. The public authorities
coming under each ministry/ department should be classified into (i)
constitutional bodies, (ii) line agencies, (iii) statutory bodies, (iv) public
sector undertakings, (v) bodies created under executive orders, (vi) bodies
owned, controlled or substantially financed, and (vii) NGOs substantially
financed by government. Within each category an up-to-date list of all
public authorities has to be maintained.
c. Each public authority should have the details of all public authorities
subordinate to it at the immediately next level. This should continue till

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
the last level is reached. All these details should be made available on the
websites of the respective public authorities, in a hierarchical form.
d. A similar system should also be adopted by the States.
15. Single Window Agency at District Level (Para 6.4.2):
a. A Single Window Agency should be set up in each District. This could
be achieved by creating a cell in a district-level office, and designating an
officer as the Assistant Public Information Officer for all public authorities
served by the Single Window Agency. The office of the District Collector!
Deputy Commissioner, or the Zilla Parishad is well suited for location of
the cell. This should be completed by all States within 6 months.
16. Subordinate Field Offices and Public Authorities (Para 6.5.4):
a. The lowest office in any organization which has decision making power
or is a custodian of records should be recognized as a public authority.
17. Application to Non Governmental Bodies (Para 6.6.6):
a. Organisations which perform functions of a public nature that are
ordinarily performed by government or its agencies, and those which
enjoy natural monopoly may be brought within the purview of the Act.
b. Norms should be laid down that any institution or body that has received
500 of its annual operating costs, or a sum equal to or greater than Rs.l
/0
crore during any of the preceding 3 years should be understood to have
obtained 'substantial funding' from the government for the period and
purpose of such funding.
c. Any information which, if it were held by the government, would be
subject to disclosure under the law, must remain subject to such disclosure
even when it is transferred to a non-government body or institution.
d. This could be achieved by way of removal of difficulties under Section 30
of the Act.
18. Time Limit for Information beyond 20 Years (Para 6.7.6):

Right to Information - Master Key to Good Governance
a. The stipulation of making available 20-year-old records on request
should be applicable only to those public records which need to be
preserved for such a period. In respect of all other records, the period
of availability will be limited to the period for which they should be
preserved under the record keeping procedures.
b. If any public authority intends to reduce the period up to which any
category of record is to be kept, it shall do so after taking concurrence of
the Public Records Office as suggested in para 5.4.11.
c. These recommendations could be implemented by way of removal of
difficulties under Section 30 of the Act.
19. Mechanism for Redressal of Public Grievances (Para 6.8.3):
a. States may be advised to set up independent public grievances redressal
authorities to deal with complaints of delay, harassment or corruption.
These authorities should work in dose coordination with the SIC s/District
Single Window Agencies, and help citizens use information as a tool to
fight against corruption and misgovemance, or for better services.
20. Frivolous and Vexatious Requests (Para 6.9.5):
a. Section 7 may be amended to insert sub section (10) as follows:
if
"The PIO may refuse a request for information the request is manifestly
frivolous or vexatious.
Provided that such a refusal shall be communicated within 15 days of
receipt ofa pplication, with the prior approval oft he appellate authority.
Providedf urther that all such refusals shall stand transferred to CIC/SIC,
if
as the case may be and the CIC/SIC shall dispose of the case as it is an
appeal under section 19(3) oft he RTIA ct".
b. It may be provided that information can be denied if the work involved
in processing the request would substantially and unreasonably divert the
resources of the public body.
Provided that such a refusal shall be communicated within 15 days of
receipt of application, with the prior approval of the appellate authority.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Provided further that all such refusals shall stand transferred to CIC/SIC,
as the case may be and the CIC/SIC shall dispose of the case as if it is an
appeal under section 19(3} of the RTI Act.
This may be accomplished by way of removal of difficulties or framing of
appropriate Rules.
21. Application of the Act to the Legislature and the Judiciary (Para 7.11):
a. A system of indexing and cataloguing of records of the legislatures, which
facilitates easy access should be put in place. This could be best achieved
by digitising all the records and providing access to citizens with facilities
for retrieving records based on intelligible searches.
b. A tracking mechanism needs to be developed so that the action taken
by the executive branch on various reports like CAG, Commissions of
Enquiry and House Committees is available to legislators and public,
online.
c. The working of the legislative committees should be thrown open to the
public. The presiding officer of the committee, if required in the interest
of State or privacy, may hold proceedings in camera.
d. The records at the district court and the subordinate courts should be
stored in a scientific way, by adopting uniform norms for indexing and
cataloguing.
e. The administrative processes in the district and the subordinate courts
should be computerized in a time bound manner. These processes should
be totally in the public domain.

UNLOCKING HUMAN CAPITAL
- Entitlements and Governance - A Case Study
1. Guaranteeing Reach (Para 5.2.1.6)
a. Awareness generation programmes should be taken up by all State
Governments. The publicity and guidance material should be available
in local languages. The effectiveness of these programmes should be
measured through independent sample surveys.
b. Intensive use ofA ll India Radio and Doordarshan should be made in local
languages as is done in the case of Sarva Siksha Ahhiyan and National
Rural Health Mission.
c. In order to ensure proper coverage, voters' lists may be used for ascertaining
the number of eligible households. This however, should not be the
sole basis for registering households under NREGA. The number of
households registered should be monitored and compared against other
data like census, BPL survey etc, so that affirmative action could be taken
wherever the participation is not satisfactory.
d. Independent monitors, wherever necessary, should be deployed in areas
where participation of vulnerable sections is not adequate, to ensure that
the weaker sections are participating and getting their entidements. It
also needs to be ensured that all habitations/hamlets get fully covered.
e. Special norms should be worked out for various parameters of the Scheme
for difficult areas.
f. 'Household' should be defined to mean a nuclear family i.e. husband, wife
and minor children, and may include any person wholly or substantially
dependent on the head of the family.
I .• I

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
g. Job-cards should be issued separately to each adult physically challenged
person.
2. Guaranteeing Outcomes: (Para 5.2.2.6)
a. An evaluation should be carried out to assess the socio-economic impact
of NREGA. This evaluation should encompass the following activities:
al. Identifying the parameters to be evaluated: These parameters
should capture the livelihood security. The following parameters
are suggested
(i) Average annual income of households.
(ii) Prevalent market wages for agricultural labour.
(iii) Average number of days a family migrates in search of
labour.
(iv) Productivity of small and marginal land holdings.
(v) Quality and contribution of assets.
Before finalizing the list of parameters, each of them should be
validated after a field study.
a2. Conducting a baseline survey: This should be concluded within
three months.
a3. Fixing threshold levels for parameters to signal successful
implementation of NREGA.
a4. Impact evaluation: The first evaluation should be carried out on
completion of three years of implementation of the NREGA.
b. This outcome evaluation could be d,one as part of the expanded task of
the National Sample Survey Organisation (NSSO) to develop district and
sub-district level data.

Unlocking Human Capital: Entitlements and Governance - A Case Study
3. Ensuring Convergence (Para 5.2.3.6)
a. Baseline performance indicators should be worked out for important
services such as health and education and efforts should be made to
improve them continuously.
b. Rural development programmes, which could be best managed at the
local level, should be transferred to the Panchayati Raj institutions.
c. There should be only one Plan for an area so that an integrated view of
development of the area could be taken. All sectoral!s chemewise plans
should be culled out from this plan.
d. To the extent possible, the earthwork components of other asset creation
programmes should be taken up under NREGA. Specifically, the projects
under Bharat Nirman may be dove-tailed with NREGA.
4. Expanding the Scheme (Para 5.2.4.2)
a. The extension of NREGA to remaining areas should be taken up in a
phased manner. While expanding the coverage of the NREGA, the block
should be taken as the unit instead of the district, with the most backward
blocks to be included first. In order to bring objectivity, the expansion plan
should be finalized within six months and announced well in advance.
5. Fixing Wage Rates (Para 5.3.2.7)
a. The provisions regarding prescription of wages under NREGA and the
Minimum Wages Act would require detailed examination. A task force
comprising representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development, Ministy
of Labour, Ministry of Law and Justice and a few State Governments may
be constituted to examine and make recommendations on this issue.
6. Financial Management System (Para5.3.3.15)
a. Funds from Government of India should be transferred direcdy to the
districts.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
b. The State Government's contribution may be fixed at 10 per cent of the
total cost of REGS in a year, and may be made annually. If the state
does not make this contribution, it may be deducted from its 'Central
Assistance for State Plans'.
c. Target (maximum) levels of funds should be fixed for Panchayats (village,
block and district levels). Government of India should release funds to
districts every month, so that the target levels are restored. The district
in turn should release funds to blocks to bring their funds upto the
prescribed target levels. Finally the blocks should replenish the funds at
the Gram Panchayats.
d. The system of releasing funds based on utilization certificates should be
replaced with a system of concurrent monitoring and audit through an
independent agency.
e. The audit should be taken up every quarter, and if major irregularities
are found, the concerned Panchayat should immediately make good the
misutilised amounts from its own funds (not NREGA funds). It should
initiate action for recovery against those concerned. If there is a prima
facie case of corruption, criminal cases should be launched against the
concerned persons.
f. The target (maximum) level of funds required for Gram Panchayats may
be fixed at two months requirements, and so also for the blocks and
districts.
g. A uniform financial information How system should be prescribed for the
entire country.
7. Mode of payment to workers: (Para 5.3.3.16.3)
a. The ultimate choice of the mode of payment should be left to the workers;
payment in cash may be the preferred option. The person/a gency preparing
the muster roll must be different from the person/agency making payment
to the workers.
. b. In drought prone and remote areas (tribal and hilly areas), a part of the
wages may be disbursed in terms of foodgrains. In all cases, quality and
timely availability of foodgrains should be ensured.

Unlocking Human Capital: Entitlements and Governance - A Case Study
8. Role of Banks and Post Offices in Fund Flow: (Para 5.3.3.18.5)
a. The post office network should be used along with the bank network for
How of funds and the procedural bottlenecks addressed.
b. Banks and post offices would have to play a more proactive role in
handling these accounts. Procedures, especially in post offices need to be
simplified.
c. Opening of zero balance accounts in post offices by both individuals and
institutions may be permitted by the competent authority. If the enhanced
costs of opening zero balance accounts cannot be borne by the post offices,
the amount required may be quantified and examined if remuneration can
be given to selected post offices in difficult areas where the bank network
is not easily accessible.
d. To avoid leakages, payment through banks and post offices is a better
option. Banks and the post offices need to be reoriented to handle this
task.
9. Time rate Versus Piece Rate (Para 5.3.4.1.5)
a. Payments should be made, based on the piece rate system, and not the
time rate system.
10. Schedule of Rates (Para 5.3.4.2.11)
a. State Governments should evolve a more realistic rural Schedule of Rates
for NREGA in each district. These rates should be so evolved that, workers
both men and women, get the prescribed minimum wage. The prescribed
minimum wage should be taken as the base and the Schedule of Rates
should then be worked out. Adequate allowance should be provided as
there would be a substantial proportion of women workers. This could
be achieved by conducting a gender specific Time & Motion study at the
district level.
b. The district Schedule of Rates for NREGA should be prepared under the
supervision of the District Technical Resources Support Group.
c. State Governments should ensure that inter-district variations are within
a permissible band.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
d. A mechanism whereby the Schedule of Rates is harmonized across states
needs to be put in place. There is also need to rationalise the quantity
of labour required for a given job. The Ministry of Rural Development
should coordinate this process.
e. As regards elderly and physically challenged people, it is suggested that
while prescribing norms for a realistic Schedule of Rates the productivity
of such persons should be kept in mind. They should be assigned works
such as supervision, assistance in taking measurements and overseeing
the amenities at the worksite.
f. The Schedule of Rates needs to be made transparent. It should clearly spell
out the amounts required for the material as well as labour components
in each item of work.
g. The Ministry of Urban Development should coordinate the larger issue of
rationalisation of the PWD Schedule of Rates in various states.
11. Maintaining Labour Material Ratio (Para 5.3.5.2)
a. The stipulation that the material component should not exceed 40 per
cent of the total cost should be stricdy adhered to for each work. In
exceptional cases, if it is not possible to maintain this for each work it
should be maintained at the Gram/Block Panchayat level.
12. Mechanism for procurement (Para 5.3.6.2)
a. State Governmen,ts should evolve transparent procurement procedures
under the scheme, and ensure that they are followed by the Panchayats in
a transparent manner.
13. Strengthening Local Governments - Building Institutions (Para 5.4.1.1.3)
a. Panchayats should be empowered by transferring all development
schemes which are better managed locally, to them. This transfer should
also include the commensurate transfer of administrative and financial
power and the implementation machinery.
b. District Rural Development Agencies (DRDA) should be subsumed in
the District Panchayat.

Unlocking Human Capital: Entitlements and Governance - A Case Study
c. Officers of adequate seniority should be posted as CEOs of District
Panchayat and the intermediate level Panchayat.
14. Strengthening Local Governments - Capacity Building (5.4.1.2.8)
a. NREGA should be implemented by a judicious mix of permanent and
contractual staff. Staff required for implementation of NREGA at sub
district levels should, be engaged locally. This appointment may not
be to a service but to a particular post. This could be achieved through
contractual engagement. The process should be totally objective and
transparent.
b. There should be a provision to relax qualifications in the case of local
candidates to be backed by capability building programmes for them.
c. Services of Non Governmental Organisations with proven track records
could also be used to supplement staff deficits.
d. The norms for engaging staff, both technical and administrative, should be
linked to the average population per Panchayat (village/block and district).
In hilly terrain the area per Panchayat should also be a criterion.
e. In case of smaller Gram Panchayats where each Panchayat cannot
financially support a full complement of staff, the State Government may
group them into compact administrative units for staffing purposes.
f. The following incentives may be provided to officials working in difficult
areas:
i. Liberal life insurance cover.
ii. Hardship allowance.
iii. Retention of government accommodation for family if required
outside the place of posting.
However, all these incentives should be linked to performance which
should be reviewed each year.
g. In case of acute shortage of engineers in the field, a panel of non
government engineers may be engaged at the block level. Educated youth

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
could be identified and trained to prepare estimates for works. These
draft estimates would then be scrutinized and approved by the panel of
engineers at the block level.
h. The limit of administrative expenses should be raised from the existing
2 per cent to 6 per cent of the total expenditure under the Scheme. Out
of this 1 per cent of the total funds should be earmarked for concurrent
monitoring and audit, and 2 per cent for training. Additional funds for
meeting enhanced administrative expenses should be provided in difficult
areas. (This could be 2 per cent of the total expenditure under the Scheme,
in addition to what is provided for normal districts).
i. Training should not be envisaged as a one time intervention but should be
a continuing process. (2 per cent of the total funds should be earmarked
for training activities).
j. The following subjects should inter alia be covered in the training
programmes:
i. The concept of poverty, its dimensions, causes and possible
solutions.
ii. The problems of gender inequality.
iii. An overview of Panchayati Raj.
iv. NREGA and the processes involved in it.
v. Associated laws such as Right to Information, Minimum Wages Act
etc.
k. A cascading approach should be adopted for training. Pools of resource
persons should be created at the state, district and block levels.
I. Distance learning technology should be used for imparting training in
remote and inaccessible areas.
m. There should be evaluation of training activities through independent
agencies.

Unlocking Human Capital: Entitlements and Governance - A Case Study
n. The services ofNGOs and SHGs should be used to impart trainings.
o. In violence affected areas, a District Task Force headed by the District
Collector having the Superintendent of Police, Chief Executive of
District Panchayat and other concerned officers, as members should be
constituted to ensure that the provisions of NREGA are implemented
properly, and to help the Panchayats.
p. In areas where the Panchayats are non-functional, the District Collector
should be made responsible for implementation of REGS. In areas which
are not covered by Part IX of the Constitution, local bodies under the
State law which mayor may not be traditional institutions, can be used.
State specific solutions will have to be evolved since the situation varies
from state to state.
15. Selection and maintenance of works: (Para 5.4.2.5)
a. Selection of shelf ofw orks at the Gram Panchayat and Block/Intermediate
Panchayat level should be in harmony with the district development
plan. The shelf of works should be such that watershed development is
ensured and water resources are enhanced. Stand-alone works should be
discouraged.
b. The Block/Intermediate Panchayat should ensure that the works of one
Gram Panchayat do not adversely affect the adjoining Gram Panchayat.
The same principle should be followed by the District Panchayat to ensure
coordination between works having inter-block ramifications. Inter-Gram
Panchayat works should be taken up after the approval of the concerned
Gram Panchayats involved. Similarly works of inter block nature should
be taken up after the approval of the concerned Intermediate/Block
Panchayats.
c. It should be ensured that most of the works are executed through Gram
Panchayats and need for works to be taken up by the Block/Intermediate
Panchayats should arise only in case of inter-Gram Panchayat works or
where the Gram Panchayats have not been able to meet the demand for
employment.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
16. Block Resource Centre: (Para 5.4.3.2)
a. To augment the technical resources of Panchayats at the village and
intermediate levels, a Block Resource Centre may be set up which would
include a panel of experts and professionals available at the block level.
This Centre would perform functions at the block level, similar to those
of the District Technical Support Group at the District level.
17. Entrepreneurship Institutes for the Rural Poor: (Para 5.4.4.4)
a. Entrepreneurship training institutes should be set up in every block to
train and impart skills to the rural poor so that they get the opportunity
to be self employed. This should be financed out of the funds earmarked
for administrative expenses under NREGA.
18. Monitoring Systems: (Para 5.4.5.5)
a. The monitoring mechanism as prescribed under the guidelines should
be enriched by incorporating those features which capture information
about the crucial parameters of the Scheme.
b. For the purposes of record keeping, 'employment generation' shall
be deemed to have taken place only when the workers have received
their wages. This would ensure that (a) the functionaries make prompt
payment to the beneficiaries, and (b) the financial and physical progress
complement each other.
c. Independent monitoring and auditing agencies should be engaged to
carry out concurrent monitoring and audit. These agencies should visit
Panchayats adeast once a month, check the records, verify the periodical
reports and set right any inconsistencies. The reports should be submitted
only after validation by these agencies. These agencies should also guide the
Panchayat staff in maintenance of records and preparation of reports.
d. Within the permissible administrative expenditure of 6 per cent
(recommended) of total expenditure, 1 per cent should be earmarked for
monitoring and evaluation. (Refer para 5.4.1.2.8.h)

Unlocking Human Capital: Entitlements and Governance - A Case Study
19. Curbing corruption and leakages (Para 5.4.6.7)
a. Templates of estimates of general works should be prepared showing
the inputs of labour and material required. This should act as an aid for
preparation of estimates.
b. The muster roll should incorporate the physical dimensions of work that
has been carried out in the work cycle. To the extent possible it should be
backed with a photograph of the work executed, at different stages.
c. The Grievances Redressal Mechanism as provided in the NREGA should
proactively reach out to the people to redress their grievances.
20. Transparency and Right to Information Act (Para 5.4.7.5)
a. A continuing process of training and awareness generation about the
NREGA and RTI is essential. The impact of such programmes should
be assessed through an independent evaluation, and officials should be
required to qualify in a test after their training.
b. NGOs with credibility and spatial reach should be identified and entrusted
with the task of creating awareness and capability building.
c. All documents should be prepared in local language. The estimates and
measurement books are generally written in English. These need to
be written and recorded in the official language of the state. In case of
difficulty, at least, a summary of such documents should be prepared in
local language.
d. State Governments should evolve norms about the mode of publication of
suo motu disclosures by the Panchayats.
21. Use of IT - Blocks as Nodal, Fully-Electronic Points (Para 5.4.8.1.6)
(a) Blocks must be the nodal levels of government at which all information is
electronic. This should be achieved within a year.
(b) Any information collected in non-electronic form at this or a lower level
of government must be digitised at block level.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
22. Use of IT -A Minimum and Common Set of National Standards for Data (Para
5.4.8.2.6)
a. A common minimum set of NREGA reporting standards should be
established for Gram Panchayats, blocks, districts, states and Government
of India. Specifically, the particular fields of data to be reported at every
level must be identical. Where data is collected in manual form, the process
for data conversion to electronic form should be based on standard forms,
so as to ensure their uniformity.
b. So long as the above condition if fulfilled, states need not be constrained
to use the same software for implementation everywhere. If, over time,
some software is found to be more advantageous, a transition towards
that can be considered.
23. Use of IT -Architecture for Development (Para 5.4.8.3.3)
(a) Data from the blocks should be aggregated in central repositories in each
of the states. A single data centre may be adequate for each state, and
transmission to this centre from each of the blocks should be enabled.
District-wise aggregation of the data reported from the blocks should
be taken up to facilitate monitoring at this level too, although no data
centres are necessary at this intermediate level.
(b) A pre-determined format for bulk transmission of data should also be
established, as should the frequency for such transfers.
(c) Dedicated transmission networks for government data are not necessary.
Wide area networks established by private entities will suffice. Nonetheless
data encryption and network security levels should be set high enough to
ensure the integrity of the data from c~eation to analysis and archival.
(d) The Union Government should maintain its own data centre, aggregating
data from each of the state repositories.
24. Use of IT -Assessment of Initial Deployment by Ministry of Rural Development
(Para 5.4.8.4.3)
(a) A unique identification should be issued not to each household, but
to each individual. The members of each household should be tracked

Unlocking Human Capital: Entitlements and Governance - A Case Study
together to ensure that each household receives the appropriate benefit
under the Scheme, but the identities of each individual should be kept
separate.
(b) Computerisation of records at the BlocklMandallevel is being achieved.
It is commendable, further, that Gram Panchayat-Ievel computerisation is
possible in some states; this should be the eventual goal for all states.
(c) Periodic reviews should be conducted, nonetheless, to determine whether
the uniformity and standardisation are adequate, and any necessary
revisions should be made.
(d) The central storage of data in electronic form is at Delhi. Access to the
data in the IT system, however, should be possible for officials at all levels
of government with due access authority.
(e) While social audits are a required measure for transparency under the
Scheme, these should not be the only ones, or even the primary ones.
Voluntary disclosure should be the norm for informing citizens about the
functioning of the NREGA; this will considerably reduce the onus on
social audits.
(f) Alerts are being generated using trigger points that ensure compliance
with the rules and guidelines of the REGS. By periodic review, it should
be determined what additional alerts are needed so that these too could
be incorporated.
(g) A Geographic Information System for visualisation of data on map spaces
must be developed. Given the scale and complexity of the records being
maintained, their analysis solely from databases will limit the efficiency of
scrutiny'; visualisation to identify strengths and weaknesses in geographic
terms is therefore needed.
(h) Rankings of districts based on outcome-based monitoring should be
included along with other voluntary disclosures, and made available to
the public, including on the website of the REGS.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
25. Use of IT - Unique Identification System (Para 5.4.8.5.3)
a. The identification of participants in the REGS should be developed
nationally, in preparation for wider use of a national citizen identification
number. The potential for such identity to be developed congruently with
other systems of nationwide participation - e.g. elections - should be
explored along with appropriate representatives from such other arenas
as well.
26. Use of IT - IT System for financial management (5.4.8.6.5)
(a) The IT system should maintain numbered records of all transactions, and
the specific fields to be contained in each transaction type should be pre
determined as part of the NREGA standards.
(b) Specific triggers for replenishment of funds for implementers should be
set in the IT system.
(c) Direct transfer of money from the origin of funds to the implementer's
account should be possible. Intermediate levels of government should
have access to this information, but for informational purposes only.
(d) Requests for replenishment should also be enabled without triggers, so
that exigencies can be managed. A login-based system to facilitate this is
needed, to ensure its security. Digital signatures could also be created for
officers identified as vested with such authority.
27. Use of IT - IT System for monitoring and evaluation (Para 5.4.8.7.5)
(a) A comprehensive list of quantitative measures for the detection of
inconsistencies between operations and rules should be established
within the IT system. These should be directly derived from the rules
themselves - each of the rules!g uidelines should be considered alongside
the question "can this be monitored in real-time?" and the appropriate
measure of detection should be developed.
(b) Violations of the rules using any of the quantified measures should
trigger alerts in the IT system, which should be routed to the appropriate
supervisory official.

Unlocking Human Capital: Entitlements and Governance - A Case Study
(c) Performance variables for the REGS as a whole should be identified, and
these should be applied to data at all implementing levels. In addition to
the implementing levels, the data should also be aggregated by jurisdiction
and ranks established for all blocks, districts and states according to the
measures of performance. Such output should be public as part of the
Governments disclosures under the RTI law.
(d) A Geographic Information System for the REGS should be developed and
information that is developed through aggregation should be presented
through this system as well. A zoom-able and pan-able interface should
allow performance to be understood at different levels of administration
&om the same base data. Wherever possible, suo moto disclosures should
be in GIS format also, in addition to their other means of dissemination.
28. Use of IT - Right to Information in NREGA and use of IT (Para 5.4.8.8.4)
a. Information that is required to be disclosed suo motu by various
implementing arms of government should be clearly identified for each
level of government, and wherever possible the IT system should be able
to integrate the data necessary for such reporting, and generate suo motu
reports automatically.
b. A list of questions that the IT system should be able to answer, to
assure compliance with the RTI Act, must be created. This list must be
periodically revised to include additional questions and make higher
standards of disclosure possible.
c. The same data should be used for administrative purposes as well as RTI
related disclosure. The government, citizens and other stakeholders should
all have information based on the same set of data, and the information
available with each should be created from a common database.
29. Use of IT -Smart Cards (Para 5.4.8.9.5)
a. A few pilot projects in different regions may be taken up in a cluster of
villages using SMART Cards. Such SMART cards should store information
about the person's identity (including biometrics) and should have the
capacity of recording transactions under NREGA and even authorize
payments. In the long run, a viable business model needs to be developed
so that the private sector can participate.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
30. Implementation ofNREGA in Fifth and Sixth Schedule Areas (Para 5.4.9.4)
a. The recommendations of the expert group on "Planning at the Grassroots
Level" (March, 2006) should be implemented in a time bound mann-ere
{The recommendations are at Annexure V(2)}
b. The recommendations of the NCRWC contained in para 9.23(i) to (iii) of
their Report, should be acted upon immediately
31. Implementation of NREGA in areas affected by natural calamities (Para
5.4.10.5)
a. Demand for employment in any area should be first met through works
under NREGA. Relief works (in cases of natural calamities) should
be taken up only if demand for work exists and the households have
exhausted their entitlements under NREGA.
32. Relaxation of Certain Restrictive Provisions. (Para 5.4.11.1.3)
a. The list of works in Schedule I needs to be enlarged. For the purpose,
suggestions should be obtained from the State Governments and the list
should be made comprehensive to meet the demands of topography and
climate.
b. Land development activities may be permitted in the lands of small and
marginal farmers.
33. Number of workers to commence a work (Para 5.4.11.2.2)
a. The minimum number of workers required for commencing a work may
be reduced from the present number of 50 to 20.
34. Records (Para 5.4.12.6)
a. Each Gram Panchayat should have a Job Card Ledger in the Panchayat,
which should be a shadow of the job cards. This would have the dual
advantage of preventing any tampering in the job cards and also having
the entire information available in the Panchayat. In Gram Panchayats,
which have computers, this would not be an extra effort. In Panchayats,
which do not have computers, this could be a simple register, which would

Unlocking Human Capital: Entitlements and Governance - A Case Study
have the same entries as in the job card. This register should be updated
every week whenever payment of wages is made.
b. Records should be kept in a manner that enables accounting of each work
voucher-wise, so that it is possible to track every voucher to a work and
also get voucher-wise utilization of funds for each work.
c. Formats of some registers need to be amended as suggested in para
5.4.12.
35. Coordination Mechanism (Para 5.4.13.5)
a. A common inter-ministerial, empowered steering committee for NREGA,
other Hag-ship programmes and the Bharat Nirman Programme may be
set up with the Cabinet Secretary as the Chairman and Secretaries of
concerned Ministries/Departments as members. The Committee may be
given adequate powers to:
(i) oversee the work of sectoral ministerial committees in order to
remove differences, bottlenecks and lack of synergy and issue
directions to bring about an integrated approach.
(ii) take timely and appropriate decisions for effective and accountable
implementation of the concerned programmes.
(iii) bring about better coordination in implementation.
(iv) ensure the centrality of local governments in the implementation
at the local levels and also as part of the local planning process
mandated by the Commission.
b. Similar empowered committees may be set up at the state and district
levels.
36. Building a national identify (Para 5.4.14.2)
a. This initiative taken up through NREGA may be called 'Rashtriya
Sukshema Abhiyan'.

CRISIS MANAGEMENT
- From Despair to Hope
1. Constitutional provision -Is there need for a separate entry (Para 4.1.5)
a. A new entry, "Management of Disasters and Emergencies, natural or
man-made", may be included in List III (Concurrent List) of the Seventh
Schedule of the Constitution.
2. Analysis of the Disaster Management Act, 2005: (Para 4.2.3.5)
The Disaster Management Act, 2005 (Central Act) needs to be amended to bring in
the following features:
a. Disaster/Crisis Management should continue to be the primary
responsibility of the State Governments and the Union Government
should playa supportive role.
b. The Act should provide categorization of disasters (say, local, district,
state or national level) . This categorization along with intensity of each
type of disaster will help in determining the level of authority primarily
responsible for dealing with the disaster as well as the scale of response -
detailed guidelines may be stipulated by the NDMA on this subject.
c. The functions of the National Disaster Management Authority should
be: to recommend policies, to lay down guidelines for preparation of
different disaster management plans and standard operating procedures;
to promote and organize vulnerability studies, research and evaluation;
to advise on parameters of categorization and on declaration of national
and state disasters; to develop expertise and knowledge in the field of
crisis/ disaster management and disseminate to the field, to develop and
organize training and capacity building programmes, to coordinate the
early warning system and deploy specialized manpower and machinery'
in support of local/state governments, where required; to advise on the
constitution and use of the Disaster Management Funds; and to give
recommendations on all matters relating to crisis/disaster management
to the government.

Crisis Management - From Despair to Hope
d. The task of implementation of mitigation/prevention and response
measures may be left to the State Governments and the district and local
authorities with the line ministries/departments of Government of India,
playing a supportive role.
e. The law should cast a duty on every public functionary, to promptly
inform the concerned authority about any crisis, if he/s he feels that such
authority does not have such information.
f. The law should create a uniform structure at the apex level to handle all
v
crises. Such a structure may be headed by the Prime Minister at the national
level and the Chief Minister at the state level. At the administrative level,
the structure is appropriately headed by the Cabinet Secretary and the
Chief Secretary respectively.
g. The law should make provisions for stringent punishment for misutilization
/ of funds meant for crisis/disaster management.
h. The role of the local governments should be brought to the forefront for
crisis/ disaster management.
i. The NEC as stipulated under the Disaster Management Act need not be
constituted, and the NCMC should continue to be the apex coordination
body. At the state level, the existing coordination mechanism under the
Chief Secretary should continue (refer para 4.3.3).
j. Since all sections of the Act have not been notified, it is suggested that
the above amendments be carried out without further delay. Meanwhile,
except for those sections for which amendments are suggested, the others
can be notified straightway so that the law can be brought into effect.
3. Coordination at the Apex Operational Level: (Para 4.3.3.3)
a. Thereisnoneedforaseparateministry/departmentofdisastermanagement
at the national or the state level.
b. The NEe as stipulated under the Disaster Management Act, 2005 need not
be constituted, and the NCMC can continue to be the apex coordination
body. At the state level, the existing coordination mechanism under the
Chief Secretary may continue.
I
I

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
c. Notwithstanding the establishment of NDRF, the role of the Armed
Forces, particularly the Army, in coming to the aid of victims of disasters
should be retained and the special capabilities acquired by the Armed
Forces in search and rescue and on-the spot medical attention need to be
maintained.
4. Role of Local Self-Governments: (Para 4.3.4.2)
a. State Governments may examine the need to incorporate provisions in
the state disaster management law and also the state laws governing local
bodies to provide for a well defined role to the municipal bodies and
panchayat raj institutions.
5. Crisis Management Set Up for Metropolitan Cities: (Para 4.3.5.2)
a. In larger cities (say, with population exceeding 2.5 million), the Mayor,
assisted by the Commissioner oft he Municipal Corporation and the Police
Commissioner should be direcdy responsible for Crisis Management.
6. Creation of Legal and Institutional Framework for Managing Floods in Inter-State
Rivers: (Para 4.3.8.2)
a. Using powers under Entry 56 in the Union List, a Law may be enacted
to set up mechanisms for collection of data, managing How in rivers and
release of water from reservoirs, so as to prevent disasters, with inter-state
ramifications.
7. Empowering the Relief Commissioners/Disaster Management Departments to
Effectively Discharge Disaster Related Responsibilities: (Para 4.3.9.2)
a. The State Disaster Management organisations need to be strengthened
for dealing with crises. This could be achieved in the following manner:
(i) A framework should be in readiness to be put in place immediately
during crisis or on fulfillment of some pre-arranged scenarios -
the 'trigger mechanism' needs to be well defined to ensure that the
'framework' is put in active operation instantaneously.
(ii) The 'framework' may consist of officers (designated by name)
drawn from Revenue, Police, Agriculture, Animal Husbandry,
Public Health Engineering, Water Resources, Women & Child
Development, Welfare, Public Works, Highways, Irrigation, Health,

Crisis Management - From Despair to Hope
and Treasury & Accounts Departments. The designated officers must
undergo a week's orientation every year, though they may continue
to discharge their normal departmental responsibilities except when
seconded to the nodal point in the manner suggested above.
(iii) The designated officers will work as a cohesive integrated team
under one roof on whole-time basis during crisis situations, under
the leadership of the nodal officer and be responsible entirely for
the functioning of their department insofar as it relates to drought/
disaster management.
(iv) The role and responsibility ofe ach department needs to be specifically
identified and defined on the lines the Ministry of Agriculture has
specified the responsibilities of various Union Government agencies
during severe droughts.
(v) The designated departmental officer should be delegated powers
and responsibilities defined in advance and will deal with other
departmental functionaries directly.
8. Institutional Support from Science and Technology Institutions to Disaster
Management: (Para 4.3.10.3)
a. The National Disaster Management Authority, assisted by NIDM, may
facilitate a common platform between the Science and Technology
organizations and the users of the technologies. Such a mechanism 'may
be operationalised both at the Union and State levels.
9. Strengthening of National Institute of Disaster Management (NIDM): (Para
4.3.11.2)
a. NIDM may continue as an autonomous body and function as an apex
professional institution in disaster management. In addition to research
and studies, the institution needs to engage itself in documenting and
disseminating global and national best practices and in developing
planning, training and evaluation methodologies.
10. Professionalization of Disaster Management: (Para 4.3.12.3)
a. 'Disaster Management' as a body of knowledge should be introduced
as a subject in Management and Public Administration. The University

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Grants Commission may initiate the process to see how best this can be
implemented in selected Universities.
b. The possibility of bilateral agreements with foreign governments and
international institutions dealing with different aspects of disaster
management, for exchange of experiences and learning from their
documentation and research efforts may be explored.
11. Enunciating a Policy Towards Crisis Management Which Emphasizes Risk
Reduction: (Para 5.2.3)
There is need to have a National Policy on Disaster Management. The policy must
address all issues not included in legislations and may, in particular include the
following:
a. Disaster Management to be professionalized.
b. Risk management to be brought to the centre stage in all disaster
mitigation plans.
c. All efforts for disaster management to be based on hazard and vulnerability
analysis.
d. Communities and local governments to be made aware of the hazards and
the vulnerabilities.
e. Communities and local governments to be involved in formulating
disaster management plans.
f. The primary responsibility for disaster management to be that of the State
Government, with the Union Government playing a supportive role.
g. Effective implementation of land use laws, building byelaws, safety laws
and environmental laws.
I
h. Setting up a framework to coordinate the responses from different sections
like donors, voluntary organisations, corporate bodies etc.
i. Special needs of women, children, elderly and physically challenged
persons to be addressed.

Crisis Management - From Despair to Hope
12. Assessment of Risk - Hazard and Vulnerability Analysis: (Para 5.3.8)
a. Hazard and vulnerability analyses should be made an essential component
of all crisis/disaster mitigation plans.
b. Priority should be given to seismic micro-zonation of vulnerable major
cities, hazard prone areas, and urban agglomerations in a scale of 1: 1000
in Zones V and Iv, with topmost priority being given to cities with
population of more than one million.
c. Geographical Information System tools should be used to integrate spatial
data such as topography, hydrology, land use, land cover, settlement
pattern and built structure as well as non-spatial data such as demography,
socio-economic conditions and infrastructure in a common platform.
This should be integrated with satellite and aerospace data as well as data
from Geographical Positioning Systems for real time monitoring of crisis
situations and for scientific assessment of damages.
d. Scientific, technological and research organizations such as NRSA, ISRO,
NIC, GSI and NIDM should be brought on a common platform by
NDMA for developing a sound information base for crisis management.
This exercise should generate base hazard maps for district and sub-district
levels and should be completed by the end of Eleventh Plan. Till such time
the GIS based hazard maps are prepared, the conventional maps have to
be used. These maps should form the basis for hazard analysis.
e. A detailed vulner-ability analysis should be carried out in all hazard prone
areas. Such an analysis would prioritize the areas in order of vulnerability;
it should also highlight the vulnerability of different sections of society
and infrastructure.
13. Generating Awareness about Risk: (Para 5.4.4)
a. Awareness generation programmes should be undertaken using tools of
social marketing.
b. A responsible media, which is also well informed about all aspects
of disaster, is a very powerful tool for sensitizing people. Proactive
disclosures about all aspects of disaster management would build a healthy
relationship betwe~n the media and disaster management agencies.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
c. Details of past accidents and disasters and the lessons learnt, should be
documented and kept in the public domain. The Disaster Management
Authorities have to take up this task.
14. Preparation of Disaster Management Plans: (Para 5.5.9)
a. Crisis!d isaster management plans as stipulated under the Disaster
Management Act, 2005 should be prepared, based on hazard and
vulnerability analysis. The off site emergency plans, in case of industrial
hazards, should be integrated into the District Crisis!Disaster
Management Plan. The State Disaster Management Authorities should
set up a mechanism in place to evaluate these plans periodically, and
ensure the effectiveness of the plans.
b. The District Disaster Management Plan needs to have two components:
i. Long Term Mitigation Plan.
ii. Emergency Response Plan.
The Long Term Mitigation Plan, in turn, should have the following
components:
i. Long Term Development Plan.
ii. Long Term Enforcement Plan.
Annual plans should be culled out of the Long Term Development!
Enforcement Plans. State Governments must evolve a mechanism for
speedily scrutinizing district level long term plans to harmonize these with
similar plans for other districts, particularly those located contiguously.
c. The quality of on-site and off-site emergency plans in hazardous industrial
units need to be enhanced in terms of completeness and practicability of
implementation considering the ground level situation. The State Disaster
Management Authorities should set up a mechanism in place to evaluate
these plans periodically.
d. The plan should be prepared in consultation with all role players. Each
role player should understand and accept his!her roles. This would require
awareness campaigns, especially for the community.

Crisis Management - From Despair to Hope
e. For ensuring quality of on-site and off-site emergency plans (for
hazardous units), the professional expertise available, both in industry,
and in enforcement agencies such as the Factory Inspectorates should be
improved.
f. All crisis/disaster management plans should be tested periodically through
mock drills.
g. It should be the responsibility of the state level 'nodal department' to
ensure that adequate assistance is available at the district level for drawing
up and periodically updating the plans. The nodal department must
engage agencies and experts on a continuing basis to examine the plans
and bring methodological and substantive deficiencies to the notice of
agencies formulating the plans.
h. The same principles would apply to plan at other levels.
15. Making Crisis/Disaster Management Plans a Part of Development Plans: (Para
5.6.3)
a. The activities in the disaster management plans should be included in the
development plans of the line agencies and the authorities like panchayats
and municipal bodies.
b. The supervisory level of each agency should ensure that the annual
plan of that agency incorporates the activities listed out in the disaster
management plan on a priority basis.
c. Incorporation of disaster mitigation plans into the development plans
should be specially monitored at the five-year and annual plan discussions
at State and Union (Planning Commission) levels. The Planning
Commission, State Planning Boards and Planning Departments must
revise on priority basis the proforma for formulating plan proposals
to ensure that the process adequately takes into account the disaster
prevention concerns.
16. Instruments for Mitigation of Hazards: (Para 5.7.1.2)
a. Environment managenient should be made an integral part of all
development and disaster management plans.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms CommissIOn - A Summary
17. Construction of Disaster Resistant Structures: (Para 5.7.2.3.13)
a. Structural prevention measures should be a part of long term disaster
management plan for an area.
b. Appropriate Zoning Regulations need to be extended to all areas. Phasing
of the areas to be covered should be done based on the intensity of the
hazard anticipated. This would require strengthening of the Town and
Country Planning Departments of State Governments. Local bodies can
be given financial incentives for preparation of Zoning Regulations. The
hazard zonation maps prepared should be one oft he inputs for preparation
of Zoning Regulations. '
c. Building byelaws should incorporate the disaster resistant features of
buildings. Since safety codes are complex and technical, it is necessary
to issue simplified guidelines which could be understood by the citizens.
Further, these codes should be implemented in the most hazard prone
areas, on priority.
d. The importance of disaster r~sistant constructions and simplified safety
guidelines should be widely disseminated so as to promote compliance.
In so far as the rural areas are concerned, other methods of dissemination
including setting up of Building Technology Demonstration Centres and
.. undertaking demonstrative disaster constructions in severe hazard prone
areas should be taken up. Demonstration camps should also be used to
make the people aware of the concerns and the solutions.
e. The existing system of enforcement of building regulations needs to be
revised. It should be professionalised by licensing architects and structural
engineers for assessment of structures and certification of safe buildings.
The units of local bodies dealing with enforcement <:»f building byelaws
and zoning regulations also need to be strengthened.
f. The standards prescribed by BIS for disaster resistant buildings should
be available in the public domain, free of cost. This should be posted on
websites of the concerned government agencies to promote compliance.
g. Among the existing buildings, government buildings used by the public
should be evaluated and retrofitted first, giving preference to buildings
housing essential services. It would be advisable to fix a schedule for all
such buildings in hazard prone areas. Private buildings used by the public

Crisis Management - From Despair to Hope
should also be tackled on priority. A mix of regulatory and financial
incentives could be used for this purpose by the local bodies.
h. All these measures should_b ecome an integral part of long term disaster/
crisis management plans.
18. Effective Implementation of Laws and Regulations: (Para 5.7.3.2)
a. Effective enforcement of laws on encroachments, public health and safety,
industrial safety, fire hazards, safety at public places should be ensured.
The same applies to Zoning Regulations and Building Byelaws.
b. Third party audit of all major alleged violations needs to be introduced in
the respective regulation governing the activity.
c. All records pertaining to permissions/licenses should be brought in the
public domai~ suo motu.
d. There should be periodic inspectio~s of all such places/facilities by a team
of stakeholders -assisted by experts.
e. A scheme for enforcement of laws should be part of the long term
mitigation plan.
f. Public education on consequences of violations is important.
19. Early Warning Systems: (Para 5.8.3)
a. Though it is the responsibility of the government machinery and the
local bodies to disseminate the warning, peoples' participation has to
be enlisted. For this purpose, the role of community leaders, NGOs and
others should be dearly defined in the emergency response plan and they
should be fully trained and prepared for their respective roles.
b. Communications networks, with sufficient redundancies should be
established between the data collection point to the points where hazard
is likely to occur. The communication channels from the point of alert
generation to the point of disaster should have enough redundancies so
as to maintain line of co.mmunication in the event of a disaster striking.
Care has to be taken to put in place systems to disseminate warnings to all
sections of the people.
II
, I

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
c. The early warning system should be evaluated after each disaster to carry
out further improvements.
20. Building Community Resilience: (Para 5.9.2)
a. Location specific training programmes for the community should be
executed through the panchayats.
b. Crisis management awareness needs to be mainstreamed in education.
For the purpose, an appropriate component of disaster awareness should
be introduced in school, college, university, professional and vocational
education.
c. Disaster awareness should be included in training programmes for elected
leaders, civil servants, police personnel, and personnel in critical sectors
such as revenue, agriculture, irrigation, health and public works.
d. Orientation and sensitization programmes highlighting issues and
concerns in disaster management should be taken up for legislators,
policy makers, and elected leaders of urban local bodies and panchayati
raj institutions.
e. NIDM and NDMA would have to playa vital role in working out the
details of these suggestions for implementation by different authorities.
21. Financial Tools for Risk-Reduction: (Para 5.10.4)
a. Government and the insurance companies should playa more pro-active
role in motivating citizens in vulnerable areas to take insurance cover.
This could be done through suitably designed insurance policies, if
required, with part funding from government. NDMA could playa major
facilitating role in this area.
22. Research and Use of Knowledge: (Para 5.11.4)
a. NIDM should develop methodologies for effective dissemination of
knowledge on disaster management.
b. Disaster management plans should attempt to integrate traditional
knowledge available with the communities.

Crisis Management - From Despair to Hope
c. NIDM should coordinate with research institutions and universities on
the one hand and field functionaries on the other and identify areas where
research is required.
d. It may be ensured that the IDRN network is updated regularly.
23. Emergency Plan: (Para 6.1.6)
a. Since the initial response in any crisis/disaster should be timely and
speedy, the Emergency Response Plans should be up-to-date and should
lay down the 'trigger points' in unambiguous terms.
b. The district emergency response plan should be prepared in consultation
with all concerned. The plan should· be known and accepted by all the
role players. (This should be apart of the District Disaster Management
Plan).
c. Standard operating procedures should be developed for each disaster at the
district and community level, keeping in mind the disaster vulnerability of
the area. Disaster management plans at all levels should have handbooks,
checklists, manuals with precise instructions for disaster management
personnel, search and rescue teams, and Emergency Operations Centres.
d. Unity of command should be the underlying principle for effective rescue
operations. For example, in a district, all agencies of Union and State
Government have to work under the leadership of the Collector. Such
unity of command principle should pervade at all field levels.
e. The plan should be validated annually through mock drills and should be
backed up by capability building efforts.
f. Any plan would have its limitations as each crisis situation would vary
from another. Plans are, therefore, no substitute for sound judgement at
the time of crisis.
g. Handling of crisis should be made a parameter for evaluating the
performance of officers.
h. These principles apply to plans at other levels and also in case of
metropolitan cities.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
24. Coordinating Relief: (Para 6.2.6)
a. Effective coordination is essential at the district and sub-district levels
for rescue/relief operations and to ensure proper receipt and provision of
relief. During rescue and relief operations, unity of command should be
ensured with the Collector in total command.
b. In order to avoid mismatch between demand and supply, the demand
should be assessed immediately and communicated to all concerned
including through the media, so that the relief provisions are provided as
per requirements.
c. Ensuring safe drinking water and sanitized living conditions should
receive as much a priority as other basic means of livelihood.
d. All procurement and distribution of relief materials should be done in a
transparent
m~ner.
e. Monitoring and vigilance committees should be set up involving the
stakeholders. These committees could also look into grievances.
f. Trauma care and counselling should be made an integral part of the relief
operations.
g. There is urgent need to evolve objective methods of assessing the damage so
that there are no allegations of bias, distortions, exaggeration or arbitrary
scaling down. Satellite imagery could be used as a tool to validate the
reported damages. NDMA should be requested to draw up the necessary
detailed guidelines for assessment, to be followed by all authorities.
25. Civil Defence: (Para 6.3.1.13)
a. The Civil Defence Act should be amended as proposed so as to ,over all
types of disasters.
-
b. Civil Defence should be constituted in all districts which are vulnetable
not only to hostile attacks but also to natural calamities. The goal of
community participation should be pursued primarily through the'
instrumentality of Civil Defence especially in urban areas.
c. The objective should be to include 1 of the population within the fold
%
of Civil Defence within five years. Efforts should be made to enlist para-

Crisis Management - from Despair to Hope
medics as Civil Defence volunteers.
d. Budgetary allocations relating to Central Financial Assistance for Civil
Defence should be increased substantially.
e. Civil Defence set-ups at all levels should be permitted to accept
donations.
f. The Civil Defence set-up at the state level may be brought under the
control of the Crisis/Disaster Management set-up.
26. Police, Home Guards and Fire Services: (Para 6.3.2.11)
a. Policemen, Firemen and the Home Guards at the field level who are
among the first responders should be adequately trained in handling
crises/ disasters. Such training should be specific to the types of crises
envisaged in an area. More importantly, they should be fully involved in
the preparation of the local Crisis/Disaster Management Plan and also be
fully conversant with them.
b. The minimum qualification for entry to Home Guards may be revised
to at least a pass in the 10th class, given the increased responsibility and
complexity of tasks to be entrusted to them.
c. A section of Home Guards should also be given para-medical training.
d. Fire Services should more appropriately be renamed as Fire and Rescue
Services with an enhanced role to respond to various types of crises.
e. While in the long run, it would be desirable to place the .Fire Services under
the control of all municipal bodies, as a first step, this may be done in
bigger cities (population exceeding 2.5 million). In the remaining parts of
the state, the Fire Services should be organized as a department but within
a district, full operational control should be given to the District Crisis/
Disaster Management Authority. Transfer of these services to municipal
authorities should be accompanied by transfer of commensurate financial
resources.
f. Only persons with expertise in crisis/disaster management should be
inducted into the top management of the Fire (and Rescue) Services.
g. Fire and Rescue Services should be brought under the control of the State

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Crisis/Disaster Management set up under the Disaster Management
Law.
h. The NDMA may be requested to suggest model provisions regarding these
services for inclusion in the Disaster Management Act/s .
27. Setting-up Integrated Emergency Operations Centre (EOC): (Para 6.4.2)
a. While it is necessary that each nodal ministry handling crisis has an EOC,
it is clearly desirable to have an integrated National Emergency Operation
Centre for all types of crises. 'Subject-matter specific' Ministries/
Departments should deploy representatives in this Centre which must be
networked with all other EOCs and control rooms.
- 28. Organising Emergency Medical Relief: (Para 6.5.7)
a. An institutional arrangement to attend to medical emergencies is required
to be put in place.
b. Access to this system should be facilitated by having an identical telephone
number throughout the country.
c. This arrangement envisages involvement of the private hospitals.
The enunciation of the role of various role players may be through
legislation.
29. Relief and Rehabilitation: (Para 7.1.12)
a. Damage assessment should be carried out by multi-disciplinary teams in
a transparent and participatory manner in accordance with guidelines
laid down by NDMA. (refer para 6.2.6 g).
b. The efforts of NGOs and other groups have to be coordinated with
government activities at the district and state levels.
c. A recovery strategy should be evolved in consultation with the affected
people and concerned agencies and organisations. The recovery strategy
should include all aspects of rehabilitation - social, economic and
psychological.
d. Minimum standards of relief should be developed to address the
requirements of food, health, water and sanitation shelter requirements.

Crisis Management - From Despair to Hope
Focus should be placed on the special needs of the vulnerable population
that is, children, women, the elderly and the physically challenged.
e. Implementation of the rehabilitation efforts should be carried out
by the village panchayats/local bodies. The first priority should be to
get the beneficiary oriented works executed through the beneficiaries
themselves.
f. Concurrent monitoring and a quick financial audit should be carried out
to prevent misuse of funds.
g. Risk reduction aspects should be incorporated into the recovery plans.
Land use plans which ensure safety of the inhabitants should be brought
into effect during reconstruction.
h. All new civil constructions should mandatorily be made disaster resistant
as per prescribed standards.
i. A mechanism for redressal of grievances should be established at the local
and district levels.
j. For all major disasters, NIDM should conduct a detailed evaluation
exercise through independent professional agencies.
30. Revisiting the Financial Procedures: (Para 7.2.6)
a. Both the funds (National Disaster Mitigation Fund and the National
Disaster Response Fund) may be operationalised from April 1, 2007
with an initial annual contribution of Rs. 5000 crores each from the
Government of India. This would be in addition to CRF and NCCF for
the present. The CRF and NCCF would cease to exist at the end of the
award period of the Twelfth Finance Commission.
b. NDMA may recommend to Government of India the quantum and criteria
of assistance and conditions of release from the two new funds as well as
manner of replenishment of these funds from different sources.
c. A system of compiling accounts for each calamity separately with reference
to each head of relief expenditure should be initiated. The Comptroller
and Auditor General of India may consider laying down a standardized
format in this regard.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
d. Accounts as above may be available on the website of the state level nodal
agency at such intervals as may be laid down.
e. The basis for calculation -of assistance from the funds should be available
on appropriate websites.
31. Gender Issues and Vulnerability ofW eaker Sections: (Para 8.3)
a. The vulnerability analysis should bring out the specific vulnerabilities of
women and these should be addressed in any mitigation effort. Disaster
mitigation plans should be prepared, in consultation with women's
groups. Similar steps should be taken for other vulnerable groups.
b. Rescue and relief operations should focus on the most vulnerable groups
women, children, the elderly and the physically challenged.
c. Relief measures should take into account the special requirements of
women and other vulnerable groups. Particular attention needs to be
given to their physical and mental well being through health care and
counselling.
d. In the recovery phase, efforts should focus on making women economically
independent by offering them opportunities of earning incomes;
providing training in new skills, forming self-help groups and providing
micro-finance, marketing facilities etc.
e. The title of new assets created should be in the names of both husband
and wife.
f. Camp -managing committees should have adequate number of women
representatives.
g. Trauma counselling and psychological care should be provided to widows
and women and other persons in distress. These activities should form
part of the disaster management plan.
h. Arrangements have to be made for orphaned children on a long term basis.
NGOs shoul~ be encouraged to playa major role in their rehabilitation.
32. Revisiting Long Term Interventions (Droughts): (Para 9.2.5)
a. A National Institute ofD rought Management may be set up for networking
on multi-disciplinary, cross-sectoral research on various aspects of

Crisis Management - From Despair to Hope
drought, acting as a resource centre on droughts and carrying out impact
evaluation studies of the drought management efforts. It needs to be
ensured that the mandate and agenda of this proposed institute does not
duplicate the efforts of the National Institute of Disaster Management.
33. Livelihood Management in Extremely Drought Prone Areas: (Para 9.3.2)
a. A strategy for making people pursue livelihoods compatible with their
ecosystems needs to be evolved. Some concrete steps in this direction
could be:
(i) A multi-disciplinary team needs to be immediately constituted by
the Ministry of Environment and Forests to specifically identify
villages where soil and climatic conditions make 'conventional
agriculture' unsustainable.
(ii) Alternate means of livelihood have to be evolved in consultation
with the communities, in such areas.
34. Codifications of Management Methodologies: (Para 9.4.3)
(i) State Governments need to rewrite the Relief 'Manuals' thoroughly in the
light of recent developments including inputs from the NDMA and their
own experience and update them once in a few years.
(ii) Ministry of Science and Technology may compile from time to time a
document incorporating details ofa vailable scientific and technical inputs/
facilities for detecting the onset and progress of drought; and inter-face
between scientific and technical organizations with disaster management
agencies of the Union and State Governments.
35. Rationalization of Drought Declarations: (Para 9.5.2)
The method and mechanism of declaration of droughts needs to be modified under the
guidance ofNDMA. While it is for the State Governments to work out the modalities
keeping in view the peculiarities of their agro-climatic conditions, the Commission
recommends that the modified mechanism may incorporate the following broad
guiding principles:
(a) Where a certain percentage (say, twenty per cent) of area normally
cultivated remains unsown till the end ofJ uly or December for Kharif and
Rabi respectively, the affected Tehsil/TalukalMandal could be declared
drought affected by the government.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
(b) To begin with, 'eye estimates' could be used. Such estimates may be verified
with reference to remote sensing data as access to such facilities improves
progressively. The ultimate objective should be to use remote sensing
as the primary tool of early detection of droughts with 'eye estimates'
remaining only as 'secondary verifying methods'.
36. Deployment of Remote Sensing for Diagnosis and Prognosis of Drought
Situations: (Para 9.6.3)
a. Deployment ofr emote sensing as the primary tool for diagnosing droughts,
monitoring their course and forecasting prognosis is a goal that needs to
be pursued speedily and systematically. This would require dovetailing
remote sensing into the routine framework of drought management.
This could be best achieved through establishment of an NRSA cell in
identified drought prone districts. The activities of the NRSA cells in the
districts must include monitoring of other disasters as well.
37. Making Rivers Perennial: (Para 9.7.4)
a. Technical agencies under the Ministries ofWater Resources, Environment
and Forests and Science and Technology must immediately carry out river
specific feasibility studies to determine the ecological and hydrological
implications of making seasonal rivers perennial.
38. Rainfed Areas Authority: (Para 9.8.2)
a. A National Rainfed Areas Authority may be constituted immediately. The
Authority can deal inter alia, with all the issues of drought management
mentioned in this chapter.
39. Epidemics: (Para 10.1.12)
(i) To more effectively prevent outbreak!s pread of epidemics, it is imperative
that a comprehensive revised 'model' legislation on public health is
finalized at an early date and that the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare systematically pursues its enactment by the states with adaptations
necessitated by local requirements.
(ii) The Union legislation governing Public Health Emergencies be introduced
for final consideration in the light of feedback received from the states at
an early date.

Crisis Management - From Despair to Hope
(iii) Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has to ensure that requisite plans
envisaged under the Disaster Management Act, 2005, are drawn up in
respect of epidemics also and that the role of the district administration
finds explicit mention in the Public Health Emergency Bill. The structure
created by the Disaster Management Act, 2005, should be utilized for
managing epidemics also.
(iv) While surveillance and management of epidemics are the responsibilities
of public health professionals, it is clear that a particularly severe outbreak
could overwhelm the capacities of the 'line organisations'. The Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare and the State Governments must ensure
that 'standard operating procedures' are devised to assign roles and
responsibilities of agencies and personnel outside the line organizations
wherever a situation so warrants.
(v) State level handbooks and manuals concerning disaster management
should have a chapter on "epidemics-related emergencies". A model
chapter may be circulated by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
for guidance of states. It may be useful to document the past handling of
epidemics like the Plague (Surat) and Japanese encephalitis (Eastern UP)
to facilitate standardization of response mechanisms.
40. Disruption of Essential Services: (Para 10.2.2)
(i) All crisis! disaster management plans should include plans for handling
possible disruptions in essential services.
(ii) All agencies! organizations engaged in the supply of essential services
should have their own internal crisis management plans to deal with
emergencies.
(iii) The regulatory authorities of the respective sectors may lay down the
required framework for drawing up standard operating procedures and
crisis management plans.

ETHICS IN GOVERNANCE
1. (2.1.3.1.6) Reform of Political Funding
.a . A system for partial state funding should be introduced in order to reduce
the scope of illegitimate and unnecessary funding of expenditure for
elections.
2. (2.1.3.2.4) Tightening of Anti-Defection Law
a. The issue of disqualification of members on grounds of defection should
be decided by the President/Governor on the advice of the Election
Commission.
3. (2.1.3.3.2) Disqualification
a. Section 8 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 needs to be
amended to disqualify all persons facing charges related to grave and
heinous offences and corruption, with the modification suggested by the
Election Commission.
4. (2.1.4.3) Coalition and Ethics
a. The Constitution should be amended to ensure that if one or more parties
in a coalition with a common programme mandated by the electorate
either explicitly before the elections or implicitly while forming the
government, realign midstream with one or more parties outside the
coalition; then Members of that party or parties shall have to seek a fresh
mandate from the electorate.
5. (2.1.5.4) Appointment of the Chief Election Commissioner/Commissioners
a. A collegium headed by the Prime Minister with the Speaker of the Lok
Sabha, the Leader of Opposition in the Lok Sabha, the Law Minister
and the Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha as members; should make

Ethics in Governance
recommendations for the consideration of the President for appointment
of the Chief Election Commissioner and the Election Commissioners.
6. (2.1.6.3) Expediting Disposal of Election Petitions
a. Special Election Tribunals should be constituted at the regional level under
Article 323B of the Constitution to ensure speedy disposal of election
petitions and disputes within a stipulated period of six months. Each
Tribunal should comprise a High Court Judge and a senior civil servant
with at least 5 years of experience in the conduct of elections (not below .
the rank of an Additional Secretary to Government of India/Principal
secretary of a State Government). Its mandate should be to ensure that all
election petitions are decided within a period of six months as provided
by law. The Tribunals should normally be set up for a term of one year
only, extendable for a period of 6 months in exceptional circumstances.
7. (2.1.7.3) Grounds of Disqualification for Membership
a. Appropriate legislation may be enacted under Article 102(e) of the
Constitution spelling out the conditions for disqualification of
Membership of Parliament in an exhaustive manner. Similarly, the States
may also legislate under Article 198(e).
8. (2.4.5) Ethical Framework for Ministers
*a. In addition to the existing Code of Conduct for Ministers, there should be
a Code of Ethics to provide guidance on how Ministers should uphold the
highest standards of constitutional and ethical conduct in the performance
of their duties.
*b. Dedicated units should be set up in the offices of the Prime Minister and
the Chief Ministers to monitor the observance of the Code of Ethics and
the Code of Conduct. The unit should also be empowered to receive public
complaints regarding violation of the Code of Conduct.
*c. The Prime Minister or the Chief Minister should be duty bound to ensure
the observance oft he Code ofE thics and the Code ofC onduct by Ministers.
This would be applicable even in the case of coalition governments where
the Ministers may belong to different parties.
, I

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
*d. An annual report with regard to the observance of these Codes should
be submitted to the appropriate legislature. This report should include
specific cases of violations, if any, and the action taken thereon.
*e. The Code of Ethics should inter alia include broad principles of the
Minister-civil servant relationship and the Code of Conduct should
stipulate the details as illustrated in para 2.4.3.
*f. The Code of Ethics, the Code of Conduct and the annual report should
be put in the public domain.
9. (2.5.7.6) Enforcement of ethical norms in Legislatures
*a. An Office of 'Ethics Commissioner' may be constituted by each House
of Parliament. This Office, functioning under the Speaker/Chairman,
would assist the Committee on Ethics in the discharge of its functions,
and advise Members, when required, and maintain necessary records.
*b. In respect of states, the Commission recommends the following:
(i) All State legislatures may adopt a Code of Ethics and a Code of
Conduct for their Members.
(ii) Ethics Committees may be constituted with well defined procedures
for sanctions in case of transgressions, to ensure the ethical conduct
of legislators.
(iii) 'Registers of Members' Interests' may be maintained with the
declaration of interests by Members of the State legislatures.
(iv) Annual Reports providing details including transgressions may be
placed on the Table of the respective Houses.
(v) An Office of 'Ethics Commissioner' may be constituted by each
House of the State legislatures. This Office would function under the
Speaker/Chairman, on the same basis as suggested for Parliament.
10. (2.6.12) Office of Profit
a. The Law should be amended to define office of profit based on the
following principles:

Ethics in Governance
(i) All offices in purely advisory bodies where the experience, insights
and expertise of a legislator would be inputs in governmental
policy, shall not be treated as offices of profit, irrespective of the
remuneration and perks associated with such an office.
(ii) All offices involving executive decision making and control of
public funds, including positions on the governing boards of
public undertakings and statutory and non-statutory authorities
direcdy deciding policy or managing institutions or authorizing or
approving expenditure shall be treated as offices of profit, and no
legislator shall hold such offices.
(iii) If a serving Minister, by virtue of office, is a member or head
of certain organizations like the Planning Commission, where close
coordination and integration between the Council of Ministers and
the organization or authority or committee is vital for the day-to
day functioning of government, it shall not be treated as office of
profit.
(The use of discretionary funds at the disposal of legislators, the
power to determine specific projects and schemes, or select the
beneficiaries or authorize expenditure shall constitute discharge of
executive functions and will invite disqualification under Articles
102 and 191, irrespective of whether or not a new office is notified
and held.)
b. Schemes such as MPLADS and MLALADS should be abolished.
c. Members of Parliament and Members of State Legislatures should be
declared as 'Public Authorities' under the Right to Information Act,
except when they are discharging legislative functions.
11. (2.7.12) Code of Ethics for Civil Servants
*a. 'Public Service Values' towards which all public servants should aspire,
should be defined and made applicable to all tiers of Government and
parastatal organizations. Any transgression of these values should be
treated as misconduct, inviting punishment.
*b. · Conflict of interests should be comprehensively covered in the code
of ethics and in the code of conduct for officers. Also, serving officials

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
should not be nominated on the Boards of Public undertakings. This
will, however, not apply to non-profit public institutions and advisory
bodies.
12. (2.8.5) Code of Ethics for Regulators
a. A comprehensive and enforceable code of conduct should be prescribed
for all professions with statutory backing.
13. (2.9.23) Ethical Framework for the Judiciary
a. A National Judicial Council should be constituted, in line with universally
accepted principles where the appointment of members of the judiciary
should be by a collegium having representation oft he executive, legislature
and judiciary. The Council should have the following composition:
• The Vice-President as Chairperson of the Council
• The Prime Minister
• The Speaker of the Lok Sabha
• The Chief Justice of India
• The Law Minister
• The Leader of the Opposition in the Lok Sabha
• The Leader of the Opposition in the Rajya Sabha
In matters relating to the appointment and oversight of High Court
Judges, the Council will also include the following members:
• The Chief Minister of the concerned State
• The Chief Justice of the concerned High Court
b. The National Judicial Council should be authorized to lay down the code
of conduct for judges, including the subordinate judiciary.
c. The National Judicial Councll should be. entrusted with the task of
recommending appointments of Supreme Court and High Court Judges.

Ethics in Governance
It should also be entrusted the task of oversight of the judges, and should
be empowered to enqUire into alleged misconduct and impose minor
penalties. It can also recommend removal of a judge if so warranted.
d. Based on the recommendations of the NJC, the President should have the
powers to remove a Supreme Court or High Court Judge.
e. Article 124 oft he Constitution may be amended to provide for the National
Judicial Council. A similar change will have to be made to Article 217.
Also, since the Council is to have the authority to oversee and discipline
judges, further changes will need to be made to Article 217 (Clause 4).
f. A Judge of the Supreme Court should be designated as the Judicial Values
Commissioner. Hels he should be assigned the task of enforcing the code of
conduct. Similar arrangement should also be made in the High Court.
14. (3.2.1.10) Defining Corruption
a. The following should be classified as offences under the Prevention of
Corruption Act:
• Gross perversion of the Constitution and democratic institutions
amounting to wilful violation of oath of office.
• Abuse of authority unduly favouring or harming someone.
• Obstruction of justice.
• Squandering public money.
15. (3.2.2.7) Collusive Bribery
a. Section 7 of the Prevention of Corruption Act needs to be amended to
provide for a special offence of 'collusive bribery'. An Offence could be
classified as 'collusive bribery' if the outcome or intended outcome of the
transaction leads to a loss to the state, public or public interest;
b. In all such cases if it is established that the interest of the state or public has
suffered because of an act of a public servant, then.the court shall presume
that the public servant and the beneficiary of the decision committed an
offence of 'collusive bribery';
l.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
c. The punishment for all such cases of collusive bribery should be double
that of other cases of bribery. The law may be suitably amended in this
regard.
16. (3.2.3.2) Sanction for Prosecution
a. Prior sanction should not be necessary for prosecuting a public servant
who has been trapped red-handed or in cases of possessing assets
disproportionate to the known sources of income.
b. The Prevention of Corruption Act should be amended to ensure that
sanctioning authorities are not summoned and instead the documents
can be obtained and produced before the courts by the appropriate
authority.
c. The Presiding Officer of a House of Legislature should be designated as
the sanctioning authority for MPs and MLAs respectively.
d. The requirement of prior sanction for prosecution now applicable to
serving public servants should also apply to retired public servants for
acts performed while in service.
e. In all cases where the Government of India is empowered to grant sanction
for prosecution, this power should be delegated to an Empowered
Committee comprising the Central Vigilance Commissioner and the
Departmental Secretary to Government. In case of a difference of opinion
between the two, the matter could be resolved by placing it before the
full Central Vigilance Commission. In case, sanction is required against
a Secretary to Government, then the Empowered Committee would
comprise of Cabinet Secretary and the Central Vigilance Commissioner.
Similar arrangements may also be made at the State level. In all cases
the order granting sanction for prosecution or otherwise shall be issued
within two months. In case of refusal, the reasons for refusal should be
placed before the respective legislature annually.
17. (3.2.4.3) Liability of Corrupt Public Servants to Pay Damages
a. In addition to the penalty in criminal cases the law should provide that
public servants who cause loss to the state or citizens by their corrupt
acts should be made liable to make good the loss caused and, in addition,

Ethics in Governance
be liable for damages. This could be done by inserting a chapter in the
Prevention of Corruption Act.
18. (3.2.5.6) Speeding up Trials under the Prevention of Corruption Act:
a. A legal provision needs to be introduced fixing a time limit for various
stages of trial. This could be done by amendments to the CrPC.
b. Steps have to be taken to ensure that judges declared as Special Judges
under the provisions of the Prevention of Corruption Act give primary
attention to disposal of cases under the Act. Only if there is inadequate
work under the Act, should the Special Judges be entrusted with other
responsibilities.
c. It has to be ensured that the proceedings of courts trying cases under
the Prevention of Corruption Act are held on a day-to-day basis, and no
deviation is permitted.
d. The Supreme Court and the High Courts may lay down guidelines to
preclude unwarranted adjournments and avoidable delays.
19. (3.3.7) Corruption Involving the Private Sector
a. The Prevention of Corruption Act should be suitably amended to include
in its purview private sector providers of public utility services.
b. Non-Governmental agencies, which receive substantial funding, should
be covered under the Prevention of Corruption Act. Norms should be
laid down that any institution or body that has received more than 500
/0
of its annual operating costs, or a sum equal to or greater than Rs 1 crore
during any of the preceding 3 years should be deemed to have obtained
'substantial funding' for that period and purpose of such funding.
20. (3.4.10) Confiscation of Properties Illegally Acquired by Corrupt Means.
a. The Corrupt Public Servants (Forfeiture of Property) Bill as suggested by
the Law Commission should be enacted without further delay.
21. (3.5.4) Prohibition of 'Benami' 1 Transactions
a. Steps should be taken for immediate implementation of the Benami'
Transactions (Prohibition) Act 1988.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms CommISSIOn - A Summary
22. (3.6.4) Protection to Whistleblowers
a. Legislation should be enacted immediately to provide protection to
whistleblowers on the following lines proposed by the Law Commission:
• Whistleblowers exposing false claims, fraud or corruption should be
protected by ensuring confidentiality and anonymity, protection from
victimization in career, and other administrative measures to prevent
bodily harm and harassment.
• The legislation should cover corporate whistle-blowers unearthing
fraud or serious damage to public interest by willful acts of omission
or commission.
• Acts of harassment or victimization of o~ retaliation against, a
whistleblower should be criminal offences with substantial penalty
and sentence.
23. (3.7.19) Serious Economic Offences:
a. A new law on 'Serious Economic Offences' should be enacted.
b. A Serious Economic Offence may be defined as :
(i) One which involves a sum exceeding Rs 10 crores; or
(ii) is likely to give rise to widespread public concern; or
(iii) its investigation and prosecution are likely to require highly
specialized knowledge of the financial market or of the behaviour
of banks or other financial institutions; or
(iv) involves significant international dimensions; or
(v) in the investigation of which there is requirement of legal, financial,
investment and investigative skills to be brought together; or
(vi) which appear to be complex to the Union Government, regulators,
banks, or any financial institution.
c. A Serious Frauds Office (SFO) should be set up (under the new law),
to investigate and prosecute such offences. It should be attached to the
Cabinet Secretariat. This office shall have powers to investigate and

Ethics in Governance
prosecute all such cases in Special Courts constituted for this purpose.
The SFO should be staffed by experts from diverse disciplines such as
the financial sector, capital and futures market, commodity markets,
accountancy, direct and indirect taxation, forensic audit, investigation,
criminal and company law and information technology. The SFO should
have all powers of investigation as stated in the recommendation of the
Mitra Committee. The existing SFIO should be subsumed in this.
d. A Serious Frauds Monitoring Committee should be constituted to oversee
the investigation and prosecution of such offences. This Committee, to
be headed by the Cabinet Secretary, should have the Chief Vigilance
Commissioner, Home Secretary, Finance Secretary, Secretary Banking/
Financial Sector, a Deputy Governor, RBI, Secretary, Department of
. Company Affairs, Law Secretary, Chairman SEBI etc as members.
e. In case of involvement of any public functionary in a serious fraud, the
SFO shall send a report to the Rashtriya Lokayukta and shall follow the
directions given by the Rashtriya Lokayukta (see para 4.3.15).
f. In all cases of serious frauds the Court shall presume the existence of mens
rea of the accused, and the burden of proof regarding its non-existence,
shall lie on the accused.
24. (3.8.5) Prior Concurrence for Registration of Cases: Section 6A of the Delhi
Special Police Establishment Act, 1946
a. Permission to take up investigations under the present statutory
arrangement should be given by the Central Vigilance Commissioner
in consultation with the concerned Secretary. In case of investigation
against a Secretary to Government, the permission should be given by a
Committee comprising the Cabinet Secretary and the Central Vigilance
Commissioner. This would require an amendment to the Delhi Special
Police Establishment Act. In the interim the powers of the Union
Government may be delegated to the Central Vigilance Commissioner, to
be exercised in the manner stated above. A time limit of 30 days may be
prescribed for processing this permission.
25. (3.9.4) Immunity Enjoyed by Legislators
a. The Commission, while endorsing the suggestion of the National
Commission to Review the Working of the Constitution, recommends
II

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
that suitable amendments be effected to Article 105 (2) of the Constitution
to provide that the immunity enjoyed by Members of Parliament does not
cover corrupt acts committed by them in connection with their duties in
the House or otherwise.
b. The Commission also recommends that similar amendments may be
made in Article 194(2) of the Constitution in respect of members of the
state legislatures.
26. (3.10.24) Constitutional Protection to Civil Servants - Article 311
a. Article 311 of the Constitution should be repealed.
b. Simultaneously Article 310 of the Constitution should also be repealed.
c. Suitable legislation to provide for all necessary terms and conditions of
services should be provided under Article 309, to protect the bona fide
action of public servants taken in public interest; this should be made
applicable to the States.
d. Necessary protection to public servants against arbitrary action should be
provided through such legislation under Article 309.
27. (4.3.15) The Lok Pal
a. The Constitution should be amended to provide for a national ombudsman
to be called the Rashtriya Lokayukta. The role and jurisdiction of the
Rashtriya Lokayukta should be defined in the Constitution while the
composition, mode of appointment and other details can be decided by
Parliament through legislation.
b. The jurisdiction of Rashtriya Lokayukta should extend to all Ministers
of the Union (except the Prime Minister), all state Chief Ministers, all
persons holding public office equivalent in rank to a Union Minister, and
Members of Parliament. In case the enquiry against a public functionary
establishes the involvement of any other public official along with the
public functionary, the Rashtriya Lokayukta would have the power to
enquire against such public servant(s) also.
c. The Prime Minister should be kept out of the jurisdiction of the Rashtriya
Lokayukta for the reasons stated in paras 4.3.7 to 4.3.11.

Ethics in Governance
d. The Rashtriya Lokayukta should consist of a serving or retired Judge of
the Supreme Court as the Chairperson, an eminent jurist as Member and
the Central Vigilance Commissioner as the ex-officio Member.
e. The Chairperson of the Rashtriya Lokayukta should be selected from a
panel of sitting Judges of the Supreme Court who have more than three
years of service, by a Committee consisting of the Vice President of India,
the Prime Minister, the Leader of the Opposition, the Speaker of the
Lok Sabha and the Chief Justice of India. In case it is not possible to
appoint a sitting Judge, the Committee may appoint a retired Supreme
Court Judge. The same Committee may select the Member (i.e. an eminent
jurist) of the Rashtriya Lokayukta. The Chairperson and Member of the
Rashtriya Lokayukta should be appointed for only one term of three years
and they should not hold any public office under government thereafter,
the only exception being that they can become the Chief Justice of India,
if their services are so required.
f. The Rashtriya Lokayukta should also be entrusted with the task of
undertaking a national campaign for raising the standards of ethics in
public life.
28. (4.4.9) The Lokayukta:
a. The Constitution should be amended to incorporate a provision making
it obligatory on the part of State Governments to establish the institution
of Lokayukta and stipulate the general principles about its structure,
power and functions.
b. The Lokayukta should be a multi-member body consisting of a judicial
Member in the Chair, an eminent jurist or eminent administrator with
impeccable credentials as Member and the head of the State Vigilance
Commission {as referred in para 4.4.9(e) below} as ex-officio Member.
The Chairperson of the Lokayukta should be selected from a panel of
retired Supreme Court Judges or retired Chief Justices of High Court, by
a Committee consisting of the Chief Minister, Chief Justice of the High
Court and the Leader of the Opposition in the Legislative Assembly. The
same Committee should select the second member from among eminent
jurists/administrators. There is no need to have an Up-Lokayukta.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
c. The jurisdiction of the Lokayukta would extend to only cases involving
corruption. They should not look into general public grievances.
d. The Lokayukta should deal with cases of corruption against Ministers
andMLAs.
e. Each State should constitute a State Vigilance Commission to look into
cases of corruption against State Government officials. The Commission
should have three Members and have functions similar to that of the
Central Vigilance Commission.
f. The Anti Corruption Bureaus should be brought under the control of the
State Vigilance Commission.
g. The Chairperson and Members of the Lokayukta should be appointed
stricdy for one term only and they should not hold any public office
under government thereafter.
h. The Lokayukta should have its own machinery for investigation. Initially,
it may take officers on deputation from the State Government, but over a
period of five years, it should take steps to recruit its own cadre, and train
them properly.
i. All cases of corruption should be referred to Rashtriya Lokayukta
or Lokayukta and these should not be referred to any Commission of
Inquiry.
29. (4.5.6) Ombudsman at the Local Levels
*a. A local bodies Ombudsman should be constituted for a group of districts
to investigate cases against the functionaries of the local bodies. The State
Panchayat Raj Acts and the Urban Local Bodies Act should be amended
to include this provision.
*b. The local bodies Ombudsman should be empowered to investigate cases
of corruption or maladministration by the functionaries of the local
self governments, and submit reports to the competent authorities for
taking action. The competent authorities should normally take action
as recommended. In case they do not agree with the recommendations,
they should give their reasons in writing and the reasons should be made
public.

Ethics in Governance
30. (4.6.6) Strengthening Investigation and Prosecution
*a. The State Vigilance Commissions/Lokayuktas may be empowered to
supervise the prosecution of corruption related cases.
*b. The investigative agencies should acquire multi-disciplinary skills
and should be thoroughly conversant with the working of various
offices/ departments. They should draw officials from different wings of
government.
*c. Modern techniques ofi nvestigation should also be deployed like electronic
surveilance, video and audio recording of surprise inspections, traps,
searches and seizures.
*d. A reasonable time limit for investigation of different types of cases should
be fixed for the investigative agencies.
*e. There should be sustained step-up in the number of cases detected and
investigated. The priorities need to be reoriented by focussing on 'big'
cases of corruption.
*f. The prosecution of corruption cases should be conducted by a panel of
lawyers prepared by the Attorney General or the Advocate General in
consultation with Rashtriya Lokayukta or Lokayukta as the case may be.
*g. The anti-corruption agencies should conduct systematic surveys of
departments with particular reference to highly corruption prone ones
in order to gather intelligence and to target officers of questionable
integrity.
*h. The economic offences unit of states need to be strengthened to effectively
investigate cases and there should be better coordination amongst existing
agencies.
31. (5.1.12) Citizens'Initiatives
*a. Citizens' Charters should be made effective by stipulating the service
levels and also the remedy if these service levels are not met.
*b. Citizens may be involved in the assessment and maintenance of ethics in
important government institutions and offices.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
*c. Reward schemes should be introduced to incentivise citizen's initiatives.
*d. School awareness programmes should be introduced, highlighting the
importance of ethics and how corruption can be combated.
32. (5.2.5) False Claims Act
a. Legislation on the lines of the US False Claims Act should be enacted,
providing for citizens and civil society groups to seek legal relief against
fraudulent claims against the government. This law should have the
following elements:
i. Any citizen should be able to bring a suit against any person or
agency for a false claim against the government.
ii. If the false claim is established in a court of law, then the person!
agency responsible shall be liable for penalty equal to five times the
loss sustained by the exchequer or society.
iii. The loss sustained could be monetary or non-monetary as in the
form of pollution or other social costs. In case of non-monetary
loss, the court would have the authority to compute the loss in
monetary terms.
iv. The person who brought the suit shall be suitably compensated out
of the damages recovered.
33. (5.3.5) Role of Media
*a. It is necessary to evolve norms and practices requiring proper screening
of all allegations! complaints by the media, and taking action to put them
in the public domain.
*b. The electronic media should evolve a Code of Conduct and a selfr egulating
mechanism in order to adhere to a Code of Conduct as a safeguard against
malafide action.
*c. Government agencies can help·the media in the fight against corruption
by disclosing details about corruption cases regularly.

Ethics in Governance
34. (5.4.2) Social Audit
*a. Operational guidelines of all developmental schemes and citizen centric
programmes should provide for a social audit mechanism.
35. (6.2.5) Promoting Competition
*a. Every Ministry/Department may undertake an immediate exercise to
identify areas where the existing 'monopoly of functions' can be tempered
with competition. A similar exercise may be done at the level of State
Governments and local bodies. This exercise may be carried out in a time
bound manner, say in one year, and a road map laid down to reduce
'monopoly' offunctions. The approach should be to introduce competition
along with a mechanism for regulation to ensure performance as per
prescribed standards so that public interest is not compromised.
*b. Some Centrally Sponsored schemes could be restructured so as to provide
incentives to States that take steps to promote competition in service
~~~ .
*c. All new national policies on subjects having large public interface (and
amendments to existing policies on such subjects) should invariably
address the issue of engendering competition.
36. (6.3.5) Simplifying Transactions
*a. There is need to bring simplification of methods to the center-stage of
administrative reforms. Leaving aside specific sectoral requirements, the
broad principles of such reforms must be: adoption of 'single window'
approach, minimizing hierarchical tiers, stipulating time limits for
disposal etc.
*b. The existing Departmental Manuals and Codes should be thoroughly
reviewed and simplified with a responsibility on the Head of the
Department to periodically update such documents and make available
soft-copies on-line and hard copies for sale. These manuals must be
written in very precise terms, and phrases like 'left to the discretion of',
'as far as possible', 'suitable decision may be taken' etc should be avoided.
This should be followed for all rules and regulations governing issue of
permissions, licenses etc.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
*c. A system of rewards and incentives for simplification and streamlining of
procedures may be introduced in each government organization.
*d. The principle of 'positive silence' should generally be used, though this
principle cannot be used in all cases. Wherever permissions/licenses etc
are to be issued, there should be a time limit for processing of the same
after which permission, if not already given, should be deemed to have
been granted. However, the rules should provide that for each such case
the official responsible for the delay must be proceeded against.
37. (6.4.7) Using Information Technology
*a. Each Ministry/Department/Organization of Government should draw up
a plan for use of IT to improve governance. In any government process,
use of Information Technology should be made only after the existing
procedures have been thoroughly re-engineered.
*b. The Ministry of Information and Technology needs to identify
certain governmental processes and then take up a project of their
computerization on a nationwide scale.
*c. For computerization to be successful, computer knowledge of
departmental officers needs to be upgraded. Similarly, the NIC needs to
be trained in department specific activities, so that they could appreciate
each other's view point and also ensure that technology providers
understand the anatomy of each department.
38. (6.6.4) Integrity Pacts
*a. The Commission recommends encouragement of the mechanism of
'integrity pacts'. The Ministry of Finance may constitute a Task Force
with representatives from Ministries of Law and Personnel to identify the
type of transactions requiring such pacts and to provide for a protocol for
entering into such a pact. The Task Force may, in particular, recommend
whether any amendment in the existing legal framework like the Indian
Contract Act, and the Prevention of Corruption Act is required to make
such agreements enforceable.

Ethics in Governance
39. (6.7.3) Reducing discretion
*a. All government offices having public interface should undertake a review
of their activities and list out those which involve use of discretion. In all
such activities, attempt should be made to eliminate discretion. Where
it is not possible to do so, well-defined regulations should attempt to
'bound' the discretion. Ministries and Departments should be asked to
coordinate this task in their organizations!o ffices and complete it within
one year.
*b. Decision-making on important matters should be assigned to a committee
rather than individuals. Care has to be exercised, however, that this
practice is not resorted to when prompt decisions are required.
*c. State Governments should take steps on similar lines, especially in local
bodies and authorities, which have maximum 'public contact'.
40. (6.8.7) Supervision
*a. The supervisory role of officers needs to be re-emphasised. It bears re
iteration that supervisory officers are primarily responsible for curbing
corruption among their subordinates, and they should take all preventive
measures for this purpose.
*b. Each supervisory officer should carefully analyze the activities in his!
her organization!o ffice, identify'the activities which are vulnerable to
corruption and then build up suitable preventive and vigilance measures.
All major instances of loss caused to the government or to the public, by
officials by their acts of omission or commission should be enquired into
and responsibility fixed on the erring officer within a time-frame.
c. In the Annual Performance Report of each officer, there should be a
column where the officer should indicate the measures he took to control
corruption in his office and among subordinates. The reporting officer
should then give his specific comments on this.
d. Supervisory officers who give dean certificates to subordinate corrupt
officers in their Annual Performance Reports should be asked to explain
their position in case the officer reported upon is charged with an offence
under the Prevention of Corruption Act. In addition, the fact that they

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
have not recorded adversely about the integrity of their subordinate
corrupt officers should be recorded in their reports.
e. Supervisory officers should ensure that all offices under them pursue a
policy of suo motu disclosure of information within the ambit of the
Right to Information Act.
41. (6.9.4) Ensuring Accessibility and Responsiveness
*a. Service providers should converge their activities so that all services are
delivered at a common point. Such common service points could also be
outsourced to an agency, which may then be given the task of pursuing
citizens, requests with concerned agencies.
*b. Tasks, which are prone to corruption, should be split up into different
activities that can be entrusted to different persons.
:;'c. Public interaction should be limited to designated officers. A 'single
window front office' for provision of information and services to the
citizens with a file tracking system should be set up in all government
departments.
42. (6.10.2) Monitoring Complaints
a. All offices having large public interface should have an online complaint
tracking system. If possible, this task of complaint tracking should be
outsourced.
b. There should be an external, periodic mechanism of 'audit' of complaints
in offices having large public interface.
c. Apart from -enquiring into each complaint and fixing responsibility for the
lapses, if any, the complaint should also be used to analyse the systemic
deficiencies so that remedial measures are taken.
43. (6.12.7) Risk Management for Preventive Vigilance
*a. Risk profiling of jobs needs to be done in a more systematic and
institutionlised manner in all government organizations.
*b. Risk profilit.tg of officers should be done by a committee of 'eminent
persons' after the officer has completed ten years of service, and then

Ethics in Governance
once in every five years. The committee should use the following inputs in
coming to a conclusion:
(i) The performance evaluation of the reported officer.
(ii) A self-assessment given by the reported officer focusing on the
efforts he/she has made to prevent corruption in his/her career.
(iii) Reports from the vigilance organization.
(iv) A peer evaluation to be conducted confidentially by the
committee through an evaluation form.
44. (6.13.2) Audit
*a. It should be prescribed that as soon as any major irregularity is detected
or suspected by the audit team, it should be immediately taken note of by
government. A suitable mechanism for this may be put in place. It shall
be the responsibility of the head of the office to enquire into any such
irregularity and initiate action.
*b. Audit teams should be imparted training in forensic audit.
*c. Each office should make an annual public statement regarding pending
audit queries.
45. (6.14.3) Proactive vigilance on corruption
*a. Taking proactive vigilance measures should primarily be the responsibility
of the head of the office. Some possible measures are indicated in para
(6.14.2).
46. (6.15.2) Intelligence Gathering
*a. Supervisory officers should assess the integrity of his/her subordinates
based on his/her handling of cases, complaints and feedback from different
sources. This could then become an important input for risk profiling of
officers.
47. (6.16.2) Vigilance Network
*a. A national database containing the details of all corruption cases at all
levels should be created. This database should be in the public domain.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Identified authorities should be made responsible for updating the
database regularly.
48. (7.9). Protecting the Honest Civil Servant
*a. Every allegation of corruption received through complaints or from
sources cultivated by the investigating agency against a public servant
must be examined in depth at the initial stage itself before initiating any
enquiry. Every such allegation must be analyzed to assess whether the
allegation is specific, whether it is credible and whether it is verifiable. Only
when an allegation meets the requirements of these criteria, should it be
recommended for verification, and the verification must be taken up after
obtaining approval of the competent authority. The levels of competent
authorities for authorizing verifications/enquiries must be fixed in the
anti-corruption agencies for different levels of suspect officers.
*b. In matters relating to allegations of corruption, open enquiries should not
be taken up straightaway on the basis of complaints/source information.
When verification/secret enquiries are approved, it should be ensured that
secrecy ofs uch verifications is maintained and the verifications are done in
such a manner that neither the suspect officer nor anybody else comes to
know about it. Such secrecy is essential not only to protect the reputation
of innocent and honest officials but also to ensure the effectiveness of
an open criminal investigation. Such secrecy of verification/enquiry will
ensure that in case the allegations are found to be incorrect, the matter
can be dosed without anyone having come to know of it. The Inquiry /
Verification Officers should be in a position to appreciate the sensitivities
involved in handling allegations of corruption.
*c. The evaluation of the results of verification/enquiries should be done in
a competent and just manner. Much injustice can occur due to faulty
evaluation of the facts and the evidence collected in support of such facts.
Personnel handling this task should not only be competent and honest
but also impartial and imbued with a sense of justice.
*d. Whenever an Inquiry Officer requires to consult an expert to understand
technical / complex issues, he can do so, but the essential requirement of
proper application of mind has to take place at every stage to ensure that
no injustice is caused to the honest and the innocent.

Ethics in Governance
*e. CapaCity building in the anti-corruption agencies should be assured
through training and by associating the required experts during enquiries!
investigations. Capacity building among public servants who are expected
to take commercial! financial decisions should be built through suitable
training programmes.
*f. The supervisory officers in the investigating agencies should ensure that
only those public servants are prosecuted against whom the evidence is
strong.
*g. There should be profiling of officers. The capabilities, professional
competence, integrity and reputation of every government servant
must be charted out and brought on record. Before proceeding against
any government servant, reference should be made to the profile of the
government servant concerned.
*h. A special investigation unit should be attached to the proposed Lokpal
(Rashtriya Lokayukta) !State LokayuktasNigilance Commission, to
investigate allegations of corruption against investigative agencies. This
unit should be multi-disciplinary and should also investigate cases of
allegations of harassment against the investigating agency. Similar units
should also be set up in States.

PUBLIC ORDER
- Justice for each ... Peace for all
1. (Para 5.2.1.8) State Government and the Police
a. The following provision should be incorporated in the respective Police
Acts:
It shall be the responsibility of the State Government to ensure efficient,
effective, responsive and accountable functioning ofp olice for the entire
state. For this purpose, the power ofs uperintendence oft he police service
shall vest in and be exercised by the State Government in accordance with
the provisions ofl aw.
The State Government shall exercise its superintendence over the police in
such manner and to such an extent as to promote the professional efficiency of
the police and ensure that its performance is at all times in accordance with
the law. This shall be achieved through laying down policies andg uidelines,
setting standards for quality policing, facilitating their implementation and
ensuring that the police performs its task in a professional manner with
functional autonomy.
No government functionary shall issue any instructions to any police
functionary which are illegal or malafide.
b. 'Obstruction of justice' should also be defined as an offence under
the law.
2. (Para 5.2.2.30) Separation of Investigation from other Functions
a. Crime Investigation should be separated from other policing functions.
A Crime Investigation Agency should be constituted in each state.
b. This agency should be headed by a Chief of Investigation under the
administrative control of a Board of Investigation, to be headed by a retired/
sitting judge of the High Court. The Board should have an eminent lawyer,

Public Order - Justice for each ...P eace for all
an eminent citizen, a retired police officer, a retired civil servant, the Home
Secretary (ex-officio), the Director General of Police (e x-Officio), Chief of
the Crime Investigation Agency (ex-officio) and the Chief of Prosecution
(ex-officio) as Members.
c. The Chairman and Members of the Board of Investigation should be
appointed by a high-powered collegium, headed by the Chief Minister
and comprising the Speaker of the Assembly, Chief Justice of the High
Court, the Home Minister and the Leader of Opposition in the Legislative
Assembly. The Chief of Investigation should be appointed by the State
Government on the recommendation of the Board of Investigation.
d. The Chief of the Crime Investigation Agency should have full autonomy
in matters of investigation. He shall have a minimum tenure of three
years. He can be removed within his tenure for reasons of incompetence
or misconduct, but only after the approval of the Board of Investigation.
The State Government should have power to issue policy directions and
guidelines to the Board of Investigation.
e. All crimes having a prescribed punishment of more than a defined limit
(say three or more years of imprisonment) shall be entrusted to the Crime
Investigation Agency. Registration of FIRs and first response should be
with the 'Law and Order' Police at the police station level.
f. The existing staff could be given an option of absorption in any of the
Agencies - Crime Investigation, Law and Order and local police. But once
absorbed, they should continue with the same Agency and develop expertise
accordingly. This would also apply to senior officers.
g. Once the Crime Investigation Agency is staffed, all ranks should develop
expertise in that field and there should be no transfer to other Agencies.
h. Appropriate mechanisms should be developed to ensure coordination
between the Investigation, Forensic and the Law and Order Agencies, at
the Local, District and the State levels.
3. (Para 5.2.3.7) Accountability of Law and Order Machinery
a. A State Police Performance and Accountability Commission should be
constituted, with the following as Members:

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
• Home Minister (Chairman)
• Leader of Opposition in the State Assembly
• Chief Secretary
• Secretary in charge of the Home Department;
• Director General of Police as its Member Secretary
• (For matters pertaining to Director General of Police, including his
appointment, the Home Secretary shall be the Member Secretary)
• Five non-partisan eminent citizens
b. The State Police Performance and Accountability Commission should
perform the following functions:
• frame broad policy guidelines for promoting efficient, effective, responsive
and accountable policing, in accordance with law;
• prepare panels for the office of Director General of Police against prescribed
criteria;
• identify performance indicators to evaluate the functioning of the police
service; and
• review and evaluate organizational performance of the police service.
c. The method of appointment of the Chairman and Members of the State
Police Performance and Accountability Commission should be as stipulated
in the Draft Model Police Act.
d. The State Government should appoint the Chief of Law and Order
Police from the panel recommended by the State Police Performance and
Accountability Commission. The panel will be for the 'office' of Director
General of Police and not to other posts of the 'rank' of DGP.
e. The tenure of the Chief of the Law and Order Police as well as the Chief
of the Crime Investigation Agency should be at least three years. But this

Public Order - Justice for each ...P eace for all
tenure should not become a hindrance for removal in case the Chief is
found to be incompetent or corrupt or indulges in obstruction of justice
or is guilty of a criminal offence. The State Government should have
powers to remove the Police Chief but such order of removal should be
passed only after it has been cleared by the State Police Performance and
Accountability Commission (or the State Investigation Board, in the case
of Chief of Investigation).
4. (Para 5.2.4.9) Police Establishment Committees
a. A State Police Establishment Committee should be constituted. It should
be headed by the Chief Secretary. The Director General of Police should
be the Member Secretary and the State Home Secretary and a nominee of
the State Police and Accountability Commission should be the Members.
This Committee should deal with cases relating to officers of the rank of
Inspector General of Police and above.
b. A separate State Police Establishment Committee should be set up
with the Chief of Law and Order Police as its Chairperson and two
senior police officers and a member of the State Police Performance and
Accountability Commission as Members (All Members of this Committee
should be nominated by the State Police Performance and Accountability
Commission) to deal with cases relating to all gazetted officers up to the
rank of Deputy Inspector General of Police.
c. These Committees should deal with all matters of postings and transfers,
promotions and also grievances relating to establishment matters. The
recommendations of these Committees shall normally be binding on the
Competent Authority. However, the Competent Authority may return the
recommendations for reconsideration after recording the reasons.
d. Similarly, a District Police Establishment Committee (City Police Committee)
should be constituted under the Superintendent/Commissioner of Police.
This Committee should have full powers in all establishment matters of
non-gazetted police officers.
e. For inter-district transfers of non-gazetted officers, the State level
Establishment Committee may deal with it or delegate it to a Zonal or a
Range level Committee.
, I

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
f. All officers and staff should have a minimum tenure of three years. Should
the Competent Authority wish to make pre-mature transfer, it should
consult the concerned establishment committee for their views. If the views
of the establishment are not acceptable to the Competent Authority, the
reasons should be recorded before the transfer is affected, and put in the
public domain.
g. The Board of Investigation should have full and final control on all
personnel matters of Crime Investigation Agency. Therefore, the Board
should act as the establishment committee for all senior functionaries
in investigation and prosecution. An appropriate committee may be
constituted at the district level by the Board, for dealing with non-gazetted
officials.
5. (Para 5.3.13) Competent Prosecution and Guidance to Investigation
a. A system of District Attorney should be instituted. An officer of the rank of
District Judge should be appointed as the District Attorney. The District
Attorney shall be the head of Prosecution in a District (or group of
Districts). The District Attorney shall function under the Chief Prosecutor
of the State. The District Attorney should also guide investigation of crimes
in the district.
b. The Chief Prosecutor for the State shall be appointed by the Board of
Investigation for a period of three years. The Chief Prosecutor shall be
an eminent criminal lawyer. The Chief Prosecutor would supervise and
guide the District Attorneys.
6. (Para 5.4.7) Local Police and Traffic Management
a. A task force may be constituted in the Ministry of Home Affairs to
identify those laws whose implementation, including investigation of
violations could be transferred to the implementing departments. A similar
task force should look into the state laws in each state.
b. To start with, departments like the State Excise, Forest, Transport
and Food with enforcement divisions may take some officers from the
police department of appropriate seniority on deputation and form
small investigation outfits by drawing departmental officers from
corresponding ranks for the purpose of investigating cases of violations

Public Order - Justice for each ...P eace for all
of appropriate laws; after a transition period, the concerned department
should endeavour to acquire expertise and build capacity to cope with the
investigation work with its own departmental officials.
c. A Municipal Police Service should be constituted in Metropolitan
cities having population of more than one million. The Municipal
Police should be empowered to deal with the offences prescribed under
the municipal laws.
d. The function ofT raffic control (along with traffic police) may be transferred
to the local governments in all cities having a population of more than one
million.
7. (Para 5.5.4) The Metropolitan Police Authorities
a. All cities with population above one million should have Metropolitan
Police Authorities. This Authority should have powers to plan and oversee
community policing, improving police-citizen interface, suggesting ways
to improve quality of policing, approve annual police plans and review the
working of such plans.
b. The Authorities should have nominees of the State Government, elected
municipal councilors, and non partisan eminent persons to be appointed
by the government as Members. An elected Member should be the
Chairperson. This Authority should not interfere in the 'operational
functioning' of the police or in matters of transfers and postings. In order
to ensure this, it should be stipulated that individual members will have
no executive functions nor can they inspect or call for records. Once the
system stabilizes, this Authority could be vested with more powers in a
phased manner.
8. (Para 5.6.2) Reducing Burden of Police - Outsourcing Non Core Functions
a. Each State Government should immediately set up a multi-disciplinary
task force to draw up a list of non-core police functions that could be
outsourced to other agencies. Such functions should be outsourced in a
phased manner.
b. Necessary capacity building exercise would have to be carried out for such
agencies and functionaries in order to develop their skills in these areas.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
9. (Para 5.7.10) Empowering the 'Cutting Edge' Functionaries
a. The existing system of the constabulary should be substituted with
recruitment of graduates at the level of Assistant Sub- Inspector of Police
(ASI).
b. This changeover could be achieved over a period of time by stopping
recruitment of constables and instead inducting an appropriate number
of ASIs.
c. Recruitment of constables would, however, continue in the Armed
Police.
d. The orderly system should be abolished with immediate effect.
e. The procedure for recruitment of police functionaries should be totally
transparent and objective.
f. Affirmative action should be taken to motivate persons from different
sections of society to join the police service. Recruitment campaigns should
be organised to facUitate this process.
10. (Para 5.8.4) Welfare Measures for the Police
a. Rational working hours should be strictly followed for all police
personnel.
b. Welfare measures for police personnel in the form of improved working
conditions, better education facilities for their chUdren, social security
measures during service, as well as post retirement should be taken up on
priority.
c. Major housing construction programmes for police personnel should be
taken up in a time bound manner in all states.
11. (Para 5.9.15) Independent Complaints Authorities
a. A District Police Complaints Authority should be constituted to enquire
into allegations against the police within the district. The District Police
Complaints Authority should have an eminent citizen as its Chairperson,
with an eminent lawyer and a retired government servant as its Members.

Public Order - Justice for each ... Peace for all
The Chairperson and Members of the District Police Complaints Authority
should be appointed by the State Government in consultation with the
Chairperson of the State Human Rights Commission. A government
officer should be appointed as Secretary of the District Police Complaints
Authority.
b. The District Police Complaints Authority should have the powers to enquire
into misconduct or abuse of power against police officers up to the rank of
Deputy Superintendent of Police. It should exercise all the powers of a civil
court. The Authority should be empowered to investigate any case itself or
ask any other agency to investigate and submit a report. The Disciplinary
Authorities should normally accept the recommendations of the District
Authorities.
c. A State Police Complaints Authority should be constituted to look into
cases of serious misconduct by the police. The State level Authority should
also look into complaints against officers of the rank of Superintendent
of Police and above. The State -Police Complaints Authority should have
a retired High Court Judge as Chairperson and nominees of the State
Government, the State Human Rights Commission, the State LokAyukta,
and the State Women Commission. An eminent human rights activist should
be also be the member of the Complaints Authority. The Chairperson and
the Member of the Authority (eminent human rights activist) should be
appointed by the State Government _b ased on the recommendations of
the State Human Rights Commission. (In case _t he State Human Rights
Commission has not been constituted, then the State Lok Ayukta may
be consulted). A government officer should officiate as the secretary of
the Authority. The Authority should have the power to ask any agency
to conduct an enquiry or enquire itself. The Authority should also be
empowered to enquire into or review any case of police misconduct, which
is before any District Police Complaints Authority, if it finds it necessary
in public interest to do so.
d. It should be provided that if upon enquiry it is found that the complaint
was frivolous or vexatious, then the Authority should have the power to
impose a reasonable-fine on the complainant.
e. The State Police Complaints Authority should also monitor the functioning
of the District Police Complaints Authority.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
f. The Complaint Authorities should be given the powers of a civil court. It
should be mandated that all complaints should be disposed of within a
month.
12. (Para 5.10.4) An Independent Inspectorate of Police
a. In addition to ensuring effective departmental inspections, an Independent
Inspectorate of Police may be established under the supervision oft he Police
Performance and Accountability. Commission to carry out performance
audit of police stations and other police offices through inspections and
review of departmental inspections. It should render professional advice
for improvement ofs tandards in policing and also present an annual report
to the Police Performance and Accountability Commission.
b. For all cases of deaths during 'encounters' the Independent Inspectorate
of Police should commence an enquiry within 24 hours of the incident.
The Inspectorate should submit its report to the PPAC and the SPAC
c. The working of the Bureau of Police Research and Development needs to
be strengthened by adequate financial and professional support, so that it
could function effectively as an organization for inter alia analysis of data
from all parts of the country and establish standards regarding different
aspects of the quality of police service.
13. (Para 5.11.8) Improvement of Forensic Science Infrastructure -Professionalisation
of Investigation
a. There is need to set up separate National and State Forensic Science
Organisations as state-of-the-art scientific organizations. At the state level
these organisations should function under the supervision of the Board of
Investigation.
b. There is need to expand the forensic facilities and upgrade them
technologically. Every district or a group of districts having 30 to 40 lakhs
population should have a forensic laboratory. This should be achieved over
a period of five years. Government of India should earmark funds for this
purpose for assisting the states under the police modernisation scheme. All

Public Order - Justice for each ...P eace for all
the testing laboratories should be accredited to a National Accreditation
Body for maintaining quality standards.
c. The syllabus ofMSc Forensic Science should be continuously upgraded in
line with international trends.
d. Necessary amendments should be effected in the CrPC and other laws
to raise the level and scope of forensic science evidence and recognize its
strength for criminal justice delivery.
14. (Para 5.12.6) Strengthening Intelligence Gathering
a. The intelligence gathering machinery in the field needs to be strengthened
and at the same time, made more accountable. Human intelligence should
be combined with information derived from diverse sources with the focus
on increased use of technology. Adequate powers should be delegated to
intelligence agencies to procure/use latest technology.
b. Intelligence agencies should develop multi-disciplinary capability by
utilising services of experts in various disciplines for intelligence gathering
and processing. Sufficient powers should be delegated to them to obtain
such expertise.
c. Intelligence should be such that the administration is able to use it to
act in time by resorting to conflict management or by taking preventive
measures.
d. Instead of monitoring public places by posting a large number of policemen
it would be economical as well more effective if devices like video cameras/
CCTVs are installed in such places.
e. The beat police system should be revived and strengthened.
f. Informants giving information should be protected to keep their identity
secret so that they do not fear any threat to life or revenge. However, they
could be given a masked identity by which they could claim their reward at
an appropriate time and also continue to act as informants as the situation
develops.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
g. In case of major breakdown of public order, the State Police Complaints
Authority should take appropriate action to fix responsibUity on the police
officers for lapses in acting upon intelligence or on the intelligence officers
in case there has been a failure on their part.
15. (Para 5.13.5) Training of the Police
a. Deputation to training institutions must be made more attractive in terms
of facUities and allowances so that the best talent is drawn as instructors.
The Chiefo ffraining in the state should be appointed on the recommendation
of the Police Performance and AccountabUity Commission.
b. The instructors should be professional trainers and a balanced mix of
policemen and persons from other walks of life should be adopted.
c. Each state should earmark a fixed percentage of the police budget for
training purposes.
d. For each level of functionary, a calendar of training for the entire career
should be laid down.
e. There should be common training programmes for police, public
prosecutors and magistrates. There should also be common training
programmes for police and executive magistrates.
f. Training should focus on bringing in attitudinal change in police so that
they become more responsive and sensitive to citizens' needs.
g. All training programmes must conclude with an assessment of the trainees,
preferably by an independent agency.
h. Modern methods of training such as case study method should be used.
i. Impact of training on the trainees should be evaluated by independent field
studies and based on the findings the training should be redesigned.
j. All training programmes should include a module on gender and human
rights. Training programmes should sensitise the police towards the weaker
sections.

Public Order - Justice for each ... Peace for all
16. (Para 5.16.6) Gender Issues in Policing
a. The representation of women in police at all levels should be increased
through affirmative action so that they constitute about 33% of the
police.
b. Police at all levels as well as other functionaries of the criminal justice system
need to be sensitised on gender issues through well structured training
programmes.
c. Citizens groups and NGOs should be encouraged to increase awareness
about gender issues in society and help bring to light violence against
women and also assist the police in the investigation of crimes against
women.
17. (Para 5.17.9) Crimes against Vulnerable Sections
a. The administration and police should be sensitised towards the special
problems of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. Appropriate
training programmes could help in the sensitising process.
b. The administration and police should play a more pro-active role in
detection and investigation of crimes against the weaker sections.
c. Enforcement agencies should be instructed in unambiguous terms that
enforcement of the rights of the weaker sections should not be downplayed
for fear of further disturbances or retribution and adequate preparation
should be made to face any such eventuality.
d. The administration should also focus on rehabilitation of the victims and
provide all required support including counselling by experts.
e. As far as possible the deployment of police personnel in police stations
with significant proportion of religious and linguistic minorities should
be in proportion to the population of such communities within the local
jurisdiction of such police station. The same principle should be followed
in cases of localities having substantial proportion of Scheduled Castes
and Scheduled Tribes population.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
f. Government must take concrete steps to increase awareness in the
administration and among the police in particular, regarding crimes against
children and take steps not only to tackle such crimes, but also to deal with
the ensuing trauma.
18. (Para 5.18.9) National Security Commission
a. There is no need for a National Security Commission with a limited function
of recommending panels for appointment to Chiefs of the Armed Forces
of the Union. There should be a separate mechanism for recommending
the names for appointment as Chief of each one of these forces, with the
final authority vesting in the Union Government.
19. (Para 5.19.6) Union-State and Inter-State Cooperation and Coordination
a. The Ministry of llome Affairs should proactively and in consultation
with the states, evolve formal institutions and protocols for effective
coordination between the Union and the states and among the states.
These protocols should cover issues like information/intelligence sharing,
joint investigation, joint operations, inter-state operations by a state police
in another state, regional cooperation mechanisms and the safeguards
required.
20. (Para 6.1.2.4) Measures to be Taken during Peace Time
a. The administration should be responsive, transparent, vigilant and fair in
dealing with all sections of society. Initiatives such as peace committees
should be utilised effectively to ease tensions and promote harmony.
b. The internal security plan/riot control scheme should be updated
periodically in consultation with all stakeholders and in the light of
previous episodes. The role of all major functionaries should be dearly
explained to them.
c. A micro analysis should be carried out in each district to identify sensitive
spots and this should be regularly reviewed and updated.
d. The intelligence machinery should not slacken during normal times and
credible intelligence should be gathered from multiple sources.

Public Order - Justice for each ...i -'eace for all
e. Regulatory laws such as the Arms Act, 1959, Explosives Act, 1884 and
Municipal Laws related to construction of structures should be enforced
rigorously.
f. Public agencies should follow a zero tolerance strategy in dealing with
violations of laws.
21. (Para 6.1.3.1.3) Security Proceedings
a. The use of preventive measures in a planned and effective manner needs
to be emphasized. Training and operational manuals for both Executive
Magistrates and police need to be revised on these lines.
b. Regular supervision and review of these functionaries by the DM and the
SP respectively should be done to focus attention on effective use of these
provisions. For this purpose, a joint review on a periodic basis by the DM
and SP should be done.
22. (Para 6.1.3.2.7) Addressing Property Disputes to Prevent Disruption of Public
Order
a. An Explanation may be inserted below Section 145 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure clarifying that when from the evidence available with the
Executive Magistrate it is clear that there is an attempt to dispossess a person
or where a person has been illegally dispossessed of his property within
sixty days of filing the complaint and that such acts cause a reasonable
apprehension of a breach of the peace, such magistrate can pass an order
contemplated in sub-section (6) of the aforesaid Section notwithstanding
pendency of a civil case between the parties involving the same property.
b. A time frame of six months may be stipulated for concluding the
proceedings.
c. Specific but indicative guidelines may be issued by the Ministry of Urban
Development to the State Governments to lay down the minimum standards
for maintenance of land records in urban areas including municipal ward
maps so as to minimize possibility of disputes about possession and
boundary of immoveable property.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
d. Detailed guidelines already exist in almost all states to periodically update
land records in rural areas. Strict compliance of such guidelines needs to
be ensured as out of date land records contribute to disputes and resultant
breaches of peace.
23. (Para 6.1.4.5) Regulating Processions, Demonstrations and Gatherings
a. Based on the experience with major riots and the recommendations of
various Commissions of Inquiry and pronouncements of the Supreme
Court and the High Courts, fresh and comprehensive guidelines may be
drawn up for regulation of processions, protest marches and morchas.
b. The guidelines should include preparatory teps (through intelligence
sources), serious consultation and attempts to arrive at agreement with the
groups! communities involved, regarding route, timing and other aspects
of procession. They should also cover prohibition of provocative slogans
or acts as well as carrying of lethal weapons. It should be specifically stated
in the guidelines that all processions or demonstrations should be dealt
with the same degree of fairness and firmness.
c. Organisations and persons found guilty of instigating violence should be
liable to pay exemplary damages. The damages should be commensurate
with the loss caused by such violence. The law should provide for
distribution of the proceeds of damages to the victims of such violence.
24. (Para 6.1.5.3) Imposition of Prohibitory Orders
a. Prohibitory orders once imposed, should be enforced effectively.
Videography should be used in sensitive areas.
25. (Para 6.1.6.6) Measures to be Taken Once a Riot has Started
a. If violence erupts, then the first priority should be to quickly suppress the
violence. In cases ofc ommunal violence, the situation should be brought under
control by effective use of force.
b. Prohibitory orders must be enforced rigorously.

Public Order - Justice for each ... Peace for all
c. If the situation so warrants, the forces of the Union and the Army
should be requisitioned and used without any reluctance or delay.
d. The Commissioner ofP olice or the District Magistrate and the Superintendent
of Police should be given a free hand to deal with the situation in accordance
with law.
e. The media should be briefed with correct facts and figures so that there is no
scope for rumour mongering.
f. The police needs to be equipped with state-of-the-art crowd dispersal
equipments.
g. The District Magistrate should ensure that essential supplies are maintained
and relief is provided, especially in vulnerable areas and particularly during
prfllonged spells of 'curfew'.
26. (Para 6.1.7.9) Measures to be Taken Once Normalcy has been Restored
a. No sanction of the Union Government or the State Government should be
necessary for prosecution under Section 153(A). Section 196 Cr PC should
be amended accordingly.
b. Prosecution in cases related to rioting or communal offences should be not
sought to be withdrawn.
c. Commissions of Inquiry into any major riots/violence should give their
report within one year.
d. The recommendations made by a Commission of Inquiry should normally
be accepted by the Government and if the Government does not agree
with any observation or recommendation contained in the report of the
Commission, it should record its reasons and make them public.
e. All riots should be documented properly and analysed so that lessons could
be drawn from such experiences.
f. There is need for adequate follow up to ensure proper rehabilitation of
victims.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
27. (Para 6.2.4) Accountability of Public Servants Charged with Maintaining
Public Order
a. The State Police Complaints Authority should be empowered to identify
and fix responsibility in cases of glaring errors of omission and commission
by police and executive magistrates in the discharge of their duties relating
to the maintenance of public order.
28. (Para 6.3.15) The Executive Magistrates and the District Magistrate
a. The position of the District Magistrate vis-a.-vis the police, and as a
coordinator and facilitator in the district needs to be strengthened. The
District Magistrate should be empowered to issue directions under the
following circumstances:
i. promotion of land reforms and settlement of land disputes;
ii. extensive disturbance of public peace and tranquility in the district
(The decision of the D M as to what constitutes extensive disturbance
of public peace should be final);
iii. conduct of elections to any public body;
iv. handling of natural calamities and rehabilitation of the persons
affected thereby;
v. situations arising out of any external aggression or internal
disturbances;
vi. any similar matter, not within the purview of anyone department
and affecting the general welfare of the public of the district;
vii. removal of any persistent public grievance (as to what constitutes
persistent public grievance, the decision of the DM shall be
final); and
viii. whenever police assistance is required to enforce/implement any law
or programme of the government.

Public Order - Justice for each ... Peace for all
r
b. These directions shall be binding on all concerned. Directions in respect
of item No. ii should normally be issued in consultation with the
Superintendent of Police.
29. (Para 6.4.2) Capability Building of Executive Magistrates
a. All officers likely to be posted as Executive Magistrates should be specially
trained in the relevant laws and procedures and should be eligible for
posting only after qualifying in an examination.
b. On the lines of a police manual, each state should also evolve a Manual for
Executive Magistrates.
30. (Para 6.5.7) Inter-Agency Coordination
a. In a District, the District Magistrate should coordinate the role of all
agencies at the time of crisis.
b. In major cities, with the Police Commissioner System, a coordination
committee should be set up under the Mayor, assisted by the Commissioner
of Police and the Municipal Commissioner. All major service providers
should be represented on this Coordination Committee.
31. (Para 6.6.4) Adoption of Zero Tolerance Strategy
a. All public agencies should adopt a zero tolerance strategy towards crime, in
order to create a climate of compliance with laws leading to maintenance
of public order.
b. This strategy should be institutionalised in the various public agencies by
creating appropriate statistical databases, backed up by modem technology,
to monitor the level and trends of various types of offences and link these
to a system of incentives and penalties for the officials working in these
agencies. It should be combined with initiatives to involve the community
in crime prevention measures.
32~ (Para 7.3.7) Facilitating Access to Justice - Local Courts
a. A system of local courts should be introduced as an integral part of the
judiciary. There should be one such court for a population of 25,000 in
rural areas (this norm could be modified for urban areas).

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
b. The local courts should have powers to try all criminal cases where the
prescribed punishment is less than one year. All such trials should be
through summary proceedings.
c. The judge of the local court should be appointed by the District and
Sessions Judge in consultation with his/her two senior-most colleagues.
Retired judges or retired government officers (with appropriate experience)
could be appointed.
d. These courts may function from government premises and could also be
in the form of mobile courts.
e. These local courts may be constituted by a law passed by the Parliament
to ensure uniformity.
33. (Para 7.5.1.11) Citizen Friendly Registration of Crimes
a. Registration of FIRs should be made totally citizen friendly. Technology
should be used to improve the accessibility of police stations to the public.
Establishing call centers and public kiosks are possible options in this
regard.
b. Police stations should be equipped with CCTV cameras in order to prevent
malpractice, ensure transparency and make the police more citizen-friendly.
This could be implemented in all police stations within a time frame of
five years.
c. Amendments to the CrPC should be made as suggested by the National
Police Commission.
d. The performance of police stations should be assessed on the basis of the
cases successfully detected and prosecuted and not on the number of cases
registered. This is necessary to eliminate the widely prevalent malpractice
of 'burking' of cases.
34. (Para 7.5.2.4) Inquests
a. All State Governments should issue Rules prescribing in detail the procedure
for inquests under Section 174 CrPC.

Public Order - Justice for each ...P eace for all
I
r 35. (Para 7.5.3.13) Statements Made before a Police Officer
a. Sections 161 and 162 of CrPC should be amended to include the
following:
i. The statement ofw itnesses should be either in narrative or in question
and answer form and should be signed by the witness.
ii. A copy of the statement should be handed over to the witness
immediately under acknowledgement.
iii. The statement could be used for both corroboration and contradiction
in a Court of Law.
b. The statements of all important witnesses should be either audio or video
recorded.
36. (Para 7.5.4.10) Confessions before Police
a. Confessions made before the police should be admissible. All such
statements should be video-recorded and the tapes produced before the
court. Necessary amendments should be made in the Indian Evidence
Act.
b. The witness/accused should be warned on video tape that any statement
he makes is liable to be used against him in a court of law, and he is
entitled to the presence of his lawyer or a family member while making
such a statement. If the person opts for this, the presence of the lawyer/
family member should be secured before proceeding with recording the
statement.
c. The accused should be produced before a magistrate immediately thereafter,
who shall confirm by examining the accused whether the confession was
obtained voluntarily or under duress.
d. The above-mentioned recommendations should be implemented only if
the reforms mentioned in Chapter 5 are accepted.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
37. (Para 7.7.1.10) The Judge's Obligation to Ascertain the Truth
a. It is necessary to amend Section 311 CrPC and impose a duty on every court
to suo motu cause production of evidence for the purpose of discovering
the truth, which should be the ultimate test of the criminal justice system.
Suitable amendments to the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 may also be made
to facilitate this.
38. (Para 7.7.2.14) Right to Silence
a. Regarding grave offences like terrorism and organised crimes, in the case
of refusal by the accused to answer any question put to him, the court may
draw an inference from such behaviour. This may be specifically provided
in the law.
39. (Para 7.7.3.6) Perjury
a. The penalties provided under Section 344 CrPC for those found guilty of
perjury after a summary trial should be enhanced to a minimum of one
year of imprisonment.
b. It should be made incumbent upon the Courts to ensure that existing
perjury laws providing for summary trial procedure are unfailingly and
effectively applied by the trial courts, without awaiting the end oft he main
trial.
40. (Para 7.7.4.6) Witness Protection
a. A statutory programmme for guaranteeing anonymity ofw itnesses and for
witness protection in specified types of cases, based on the best international
models should be adopted early.
41. (Para 7.7.5.6) Victim Protection
a. A new law for protecting the rights of the victims of the crimes may be
enacted. The law should include the following salient features:
i. Victims should be treated with dignity by all concerned in the criminal
justice system.

Public Order - Justice for each ...P eace for ail
ii. It shall be the duty of the police and the prosecution to keep the
victim updated about the progress of the case.
iii. If the victim wants to oppose the bail application of an accused he!
she shall be given an opportunity to be heard. Similarly, for release
of prisoners on parole, a mechanism should be developed to consider
the views of the victims.
iv. A victim compensation fund should be created by State Governments
for providing compensation to the victims of crime.
42. (Para 7.7.6.6) Committal Proceedings
a. Committal proceedings should be reintroduced where the magistrate should
have powers to record the evidence of prosecution witnesses. Suitable
amendments may be carried out in Chapter XVI of the Code of Criminal
Procedure.
43. (Para 7.8.5) Classification of Offences
a. A comprehensive reclassification of offences may be done urgently to reduce
the burden of work for both the Courts and the Police. A mechanism for
ensuring regular and periodic review of offences should also be put in place
to make such reclassification an ongoing and continuing exercise.
b. The objective of this exercise should be to ensure that crimes of a petty
nature including those which require correctional rather than penal action
should be taken out of the jurisdiction of the police and criminal courts so
that they are able to attend to more serious crimes. Such offences should,
in future be handled by the local courts.
44. (Para 7.9.7) Sentencing Process
a. The Law Commission may lay down 'Guidelines' on sentencing for the Trial
Courts in India so that sentencing across the country for similar offences
becomes broadly uniform.
b. Simultaneously, the training for trial court judges should be strengthened
to bring about greater uniformity in sentencing.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
45. (Para 7.10.14) Prison Reforms
a. The Union and State Governments should work out, fund and implement
at the earliest, modernisation and· reforms of the Prison System as
recommended by the All India Committee on Jail Reforms (1980-83).
b. The attendant legislative measures should also be expedited.
c. Rules regarding Parole and Remission need to be reviewed. An Advisory
Board with a retired judge of the High Court, the DGP and the Inspector
General of Prisons should be set up to make recommendations on parole.
The recommendation made by the Board should normally be accepted.
In case of difference, State Government should obtain the advice of the
Board again, stating its own views in writing. A similar or the same Board
may deal with cases of remissions.
46. (Para 8.2.15) Obligations of the Union and States
a. A law should be enacted to empower the Union Government to deploy its
Forces and to even direct such Forces in case of major public order problems
which may lead to the breakdown of the constitutional machinery in a
state. However, such deployment should take place only after the state
concerned fails to act on a 'direction' issued by the Union under Article 256
of the Constitution. All such deployments should be only for a temporary
period not exceeding three months, which could be extended by another
three months after authorisation by Parliament.
b. The law should spell out the hierarchy of the civil administration which
would supervise the Forces under such circumstances.
47. (Para 8.3.14) Federal Crimes
a. There is need to re-examine certain offences which have inter-state or
national ramification and include them in a new law. The law should also
prescribe the procedure for investigation and trials of such offences. The
following offences may be included in this category:
i. Organised Crime (examined in paragraph 8.4)
ii. Terrorism

Public Order - Justice for each ...P eace for all
iii. Acts threatening National security
iv. Trafficking in arms and human beings
v. Sedition
vi. Major crimes with inter-state ramifications
vii. Assassination of (including attempts on) major public figures
viii. Serious economic offences.
b. A new law should be enacted to govern the working of the CBI. This law
should also stipulate its jurisdiction including the power to investigate the
new category of crimes.
c. The empowered committee recommended in the Commission's Report on
'Ethics in Governance' (para 3.7.19) would decide on cases to be taken
over by the CBI.
48. (Para 8.4.17 ) Organised Crime
a. Specific provisions to define organised crimes should be included in the
new law governing 'Federal Crimes'. The definition of organised crime in
this law should be on the lines of the Maharashtra Control of Organised
Crime Act, 1999.
49. (Para 8.5.17) Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act, 1958
a. The Armed Forces (Special Powers) Act, 1958 should be repealed. To
provide for an enabling legislation for deployment ofA rmed Forces of the
Union in the North-Eastern states of the country, the Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Act, 1967 should be amended by inserting a new Chapter
VI A as recommended by the Committee to Review the Armed Forces
(Special Powers) Act, 1958. The new Chapter VI A would apply only to
the North-Eastern states.
50. (Para 9.1.5) The Role of Civil Society
a. Citizens should be involved in evaluating, the quality of service at police
stations and other police offices.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
b. Government should incentivise citizens' initiatives.
c. Formal mechanisms should be set up at the cutting edge level to involve
citizens! citizen's groups in various aspects of public order management.
51. (Para 9.2.7) The Role of the Media in Public Order
a. The Administration must make facts available to the media at the earliest
about any major development, particularly activities affecting public
order.
b. In order to have better appreciation of each other's view points there should
be increased interaction between the Administration and the media. This
could be inter alia in the form of joint workshops and trainings.
c. The Administration should designate points of contact at appropriate levels
(a spokesperson) for the media which could be accessed during whenever
required.
d. Officers should be imparted training for interaction with the media.
e. A cell may be constituted at the district level which may analyse media
reports about matters of public importance.

LOCAL GOVERNANCE
- An InspiringJourney into the Future
1. (Para 3.1.1.12) The Principle of Subsidiarity
a. Article 243 G should be amended as follows:
"Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, the Legislature of a State
shall, by law, vest a Panchayat at the appropriate level with such powers
and authority as are necessary to enable them to function as institutions
of self government in respect of all functions which can be performed at
the local level including the functions in respect of the matters listed in
the Eleventh Schedule".
b. Article 243 W should be similarly amended to empower urban local
bodies.
2. (Para 3.1.2.4) Strengthening the Voice of Local Bodies
a. Parliament may by law provide for constitution of a Legislative Council
in each State, consisting of members elected by the local governments.
3. (Para 3.1.3.11) Structure of Local Bodies
a. Article 243B(I) should be amended to read as follows:
"There shall be constituted in every State, as the State Legislature may
by law provide, Panchayats at appropriate levels in accordance with the
provisions of this part".
b. The Constitutional provisions relating to reservation of seats (Article 243
D) must be retained in the current form to ensure adequate representation
to the under-privileged sections and women.
c. Members of Parliament and State Legislatures should not become members
of local bodies.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
d. Article 243 C(l) should be retained.
e. Article 243 C (2 & 3) should be repealed and supplanted by Article 243
C(2) as follows:
243 C(2) Subject to the provisions of this part, the Legislature of a State
may, by law, make provisions with respect to composition of Panchayats
and the manner of elections provided that in any tier there shall be direct
election of at least one of the two offices of Chairperson or members.
Provided that in case of direct elections of members in any tier, the ratio
. between the population of the territorial area of a Panchayat at any level
and the number of seats in such Panchayat to be filled by election shall, so
far as practicable, be the same throughout the State. Also, each Panchayat
area shall be divided into territorial constituencies in such manner that
the ratio between the population of each constituency and the number of
seats allotted to it shall, so far as practicable, be the same throughout the
Panchayat area.
f. There shall be a District Council in every district with representation from
both urban and rural areas.
g. 243 B (2) should be substituted by:
"There shall be constituted in every District, a District Council representing
all rural and urban areas in the District and exercising powers and functions
in accordance with the provisions of Articles 243 G and 243 W of the
Constitution. "
4. (Para 3.2.1.12) The Electoral Process
a. The task of delimitation and reservation of constituencies should be
entrusted to the State Election Commissions (SECs);
b. Local government laws in all States should provide for adoption of the
Assembly electoral rolls for local governments without any revision of
names by SECs. For such a process to be effective it is necessary to ensure
that the voter registration and preparation of electoral rolls by Election
Commission of India is based on geographic contiguity. Similarly the
electoral divisions for elections to local bodies should follow the Building

Local Governance -An Inspiring Journey into the Future
Blocks approach;
c. The Registration of Electors Rules, 1960, should be amended to define a
. 'Part' as a compact geographical unit.
d. In order to achieve convergence between census data and electoral rolls,
the boundaries of a 'Part' and an 'Enumeration Block' should coincide.
e. Reservation of seats should follow anyone of the two principles mentioned
below:
i. In case of single-member constituencies, the rotation can be after at
least 2 terms of 5 years each so that there is possibility of longevity
of leadership and nurturing of constituencies.
ii. Instead of single-member constituencies, elections can be held
to multi-member constituencies by the List System, ensuring the
reservation of seats. This will obviate the need for rotation thus
guaranteeing allocation of seats for the reserved categories.
f. The conduct of elections for the elected members of District and
Metropolitan Planning Committees should be entrusted to the State
Election Commission.
5. (Para 3.2.2.6) Constitution of the State Election Commission
a. The State Election Commissioner should be appointed by the Governor on
the recommendation of a collegium, comprising the Chief Minister, the
Speaker of the State Legislative Assembly and the Leader of Opposition in
the Legislative Assembly.
b. An institutional mechanism should be created to bring the Election
Commission ofI ndia and the SECs on a common platform for coordination,
learning from each other's experiences and sharing of resources.
6. (Para 3.2.3.4) Correcting the Urban Rural Imbalance in Reperesentation in
Legislative Bodies
a. In order to set right the electoral imbalance between the urban and rural
population in view of rapid urbanisation, an adjustment of the territorial
constituencies - both for the Lok Sabha and the Legislative Assembly -

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
within a State should be carried out after each census. Articles 81, 82, 170,
330 and 332 of the Constitution would need to be amended.
7. (Para 3.3.1.7) Devolution of Powers and Responsibilities
a. There should be clear delineation of functions for each level of local
government in the case of each subject matter law. This is not a one-time
exercise and has to be done continuously while working out locally relevant
socio-economic programmes, restructuring organisations and framing
subject-matter laws.
b. Each subject-matter law, which has functional elements that are best
attended to at local levels, should have provision for appropriate devolution
to such levels - either in the law or in subordinate legislation. All the
relevan.t Union and State laws have to be reviewed urgently and suitably
amended.
c. In the case of new laws, it will be advisable to add a 'local government
memorandum' (on the analogy of financial memorandum and
memorandum ofs ubordinate legislation) indicating whether any functions
to be attended to by local governments are involved and if so, whether this
has been provided for in the law.
d. In case of urban local bodies, in addition to the functions listed in
the Twelfth Schedule, the following should be devolved to urban local
bodies:
~ School education;
~ Public health, including community health centresla rea hospitals;
~ Traffic management and civic policing activities;
~ Urban environment management and heritage; and
~ Land management, including registration.
These, however, are only illustrative additional functions and more
such functions could be devolved to urban local bodies by the
..
respective States.
~

Local Governance -An Inspiring Journey into the Future
8. (Para 3.4.20) Framework Law for Local Bodies
a. Government of India should draft and place before Parliament, a
Framework Law for local governments. The Framework Law could be
enacted under Article 252 of the Constitution on the lines of the South
Mrican Act, for the States to adopt. This Law should lay down the broad
principles of devolution of powers, responsibilities and functions to the
local governments and communities, based on the following:
• Principle of Subsidiarity
• Democratic Decentralisation
• Delineation of Functions
• Devolution in Real Terms
• Convergence
• Citizen Centricity
9. (Para 3.5.2.18) The State Finance Commission (SFC)
a. This Commission endorses and reiterates the views of the Twelfth Finance
Commission regarding the working of the SFCs as listed in paragraph
3.5.2.8.
b. Article 243 I (1)of the Constitution should be amended to include the
phrase "at such earlier time" after the words "every fifth year".
c. Each State should prescribe through an Act, the qualifications of persons
eligible to be appointed as Members of the State Finance Commission.
d. SFCs should evolve objective and transparent norms for devolution and
distribution of funds. The norms should include area-wise indices for
backwardness. State Finance Commissions should link the devolution of
funds to the level! quality of civic amenities that the citizens could expect.
This could then form the basis of an impact evaluation.
e. The Action Taken Report on the recommendations of the SFC must
compulsorily be placed in the concerned State Legislature within six months

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
of submission and followed with an annual statement on the devolution
made and grants given to individual local bodies and the implementation
of other recommendations through an appendix to the State budget
documents.
f. Incentives can be built into devolution from the Union to the States to take
care of the need to improve devolution from the States to the third tier of
governments.
g. Common formats, as recommended by the Twelfth Finance Commission
(TFC) must be adopted, and annual accounts and other data must be
compiled and updated for use by the SFCs.
h. SFCs should carry out a more thorough analysis of the finances of local
bodies and make concrete recommendations for improvements in their
working. In case of smaller local bodies such recommendations could be
broad in nature, but in case of larger local bodies, recommendations should
be more specific. With historical data being available with the SFC, and
with the improvement in efficiency of data collection, the SFC would be
in a position to carry out the required detailed analysis. The special needs
of large urban agglomerations particularly the Metropolitan cities should
be specially addressed by the SFC.
i. SFCs should evolve norms for staffing of local bodies.
j. It is necessary that a mechanism be put in place which reviews the
implementation of all the recommendations of the SFCs. If/considered
necessary, devolution of funds could be made conditional tol jocal bodies
agreeing to implement the recommendations of the SFCs.
10. (Para 3.6.16) Capacity Building for Self Governance
a. Capacity building efforts in rural and urban local self governing institutions
must attend to both the organisation building requirements as also the
professional and skills upgradation of individuals associated with these
bodies, whether elected or appointed. Relevant Panchayat and Municipal
legislations and manuals framed thereunder must contain clear enabling
provisions in this respect. There should be special capacity building
programmes for women members.

Local Governance -An Inspiring Journey into the Future
b. State Governments should encourage local bodies to outsource specific
functions to public or private agencies, as may be appropriate, through
enabling guidelines and support. Outsourcing of activities should be
backed by development of in-house capacity for monitoring and oversight
of outsourced activities. Likewise, transparent and fair procurement
procedures need to be put in place by the State Government to improve
fiscal discipline and probity in the local bodies.
c. Comprehensive and holistic training requires expertise and resources
from various subject matter specific training institutes. This can be best
achieved by 'networking' of institutions concerned with various subjects
such as financial management, rural development, disaster management
and general management. This should be ensured by the nodal agencies
in State Governments.
d. As an aid to capacity building, suitable schemes need to be drawn up under
State Plans for Rural and Urban Development for documentations of case
studies, best practices and evaluation with reference to the performance
of the prescribed duties and responsibilities of such bodies.
e. Training of elected representatives and personnel should be regarded
as a continuing activity. Expenditure requirement on training may be
taken into account by the State Finance Commissions while making
recommendations.
f. Academic research has a definite role to play in building long-term strategic
institutional capacity for greater public good. Organisations like the Indian
Council ofS ocial Science Research must be encouraged to fund theoretical,
applied and action research on various aspects of the functioning of local
bodies.
g. A pool of experts and specialists (e.g. engineers, planners etc.) could be
maintained by a federation! consortium of local bodies. This common pool
could be then accessed by the local bodies whenever required for specific
tasks.
11. (Para 3.7.5.6) Decentralised Planning
a. A District Council should be constituted in all districts with representation
from rural and urban areas. It should be empowered to exercise the

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
powers and functions in accordance with Articles 243 G and 243 W of
the Constitution. In that event, the DPCs will either not exist or become,
at best, an advisory arm of the District Council. Article 243 (d) of the
Constitution should be amended to facilitate this.
b. In the interim and in accordance with the present constitutional scheme,
D PCs should be constituted in all States within three months of completion
of elections to local bodies and should become the sole planning body for
the district. The DPC should be assisted by a planning office with a full
time District Planning Officer.
c. For urban districts where town planning functions are being done by
Development Authorities, these authorities should become the technical/
planning arms of the DPCs and ultimately of the District Council.
d. A dedicated centre in every district should be set up to provide inputs to
the local bodies for preparations of plans. A two-way How of information
between different levels of government may also be ensured.
e. The guidelines issued by the Planning Commission pertaining to the
preparation of the plan for the district and the recommendations of the
Expert Group regarding the planning process at the district level should
be strictly implemented.
f. Each State Government should develop the methodology of participatory
local level planning and provide such support as is necessary to
institutionalise a regime of decentralised planning.
g. States may design a planning calendar prescribing the time limits within
which each local body has to finalise its plan and send it to the next
higher level, to facilitate the preparation of a comprehensive plan for the
district.
h. State Planning Boards should ensure that the district plans are integrated
with the State plans that are prepared by them. It should be made mandatory
for the States to prepare their development plans only after consolidating
the plans of the local bodies. The National Planning Commission has to
take the ~nitiative in institutionalising this process.

Local Governance -An Inspiring Journey into the Future
(Para 3.7.6.2.4)
a. The function of planning for urban areas has to be clearly demarcated
among the local bodies and planning committees. The local bodies should
be responsible for plans at the layout level. The D PCs/District Councils
- when constituted - and MPCs should be responsible for preparation
of regional and zonal plans. The level of public consultation should be
enhanced at each level.
b. For metropolitan areas, the total area likely to be urbanised (the extended
metropolitan region) should be assessed by the State Government and an
MPC constituted for the same which may be deemed to be a D PC for such
areas. As such an area will usually cover more than one district, DPCs for
those districts should not be constituted (or their jurisdictions may be
limited to the rural portion of the revenue district concerned).The MPCs
should be asked to draw up a Master Plan/CDP for the entire metropolitan
area including the peri-urban areas.
c. The planning departments of the Development Authorities (DAs) should
be merged with the DPCs and MPCs who will prepare the master plans
and zonal plans.
d. The task of enforcement and regulation of the master plans/CDPs drawn
up by the MPCs should be the specific statutory responsibility of all the
local bodies falling within the extended metropolitan region concerned.
e. The monopoly role of Development Authorities (DAs) in development of
land for urban uses, wherever it exists, should be done way with. However,
public agencies should continue to playa major role in development of
critical city level infrastructure as well as low cost housing for the poor. For
this purpose, the engineering and land management departments of the
DAs should be merged with the concerned Municipality/Corporation.
12. (Para 3.8.6) Accountability and Transparency
a. Audit committees may be constituted by the State Governments at the district
level to exercise oversight regarding the integrity of financial information,
adequacy of internal controls, compliance with the applicable laws and
ethical conduct of all persons involved in local bodies. These committees

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
must have independence, access to all information, ability to communicate
with technical experts, and accountability to the public. For Metropolitan
Corporations, separate audit committees should be constituted. Once the
District Councils come into existence, a special committee of the District
Council may examine the audit reports and other financial statements of
the local bodies within the district. Such committee may also be authorised
to fix responsibility for financial lapses. In respect of the audit reports of
the District Council itself, a special committee of the Legislative Council
may discharge a similar function.
b. There should be a separate Standing Committee of the State Legislature for
the local Bodies. This Committee may function in the manner of a Public
Accounts Committee.
c. A local body Ombudsman should be constituted on the lines suggested
below. The respective State Panchayat Acts and the Urban local Bodies
Acts should be alnended to include provisions pertaining to the local body
Ombudsman.
i. Local body Ombudsman should be constituted for a group of districts
to look into complaints of corruption and maladministration against
functionaries of local bodies, both elected members and officials.
For this, the term 'Public Servant' should be defined appropriately
in the respective State legislations.
ii. Local body Ombudsman should be a single member body appointed by
a Committee consisting of the ChiefM inister of the State, the Speaker
of the State Legislative Assembly and the Leader of the Opposition in
the Legislative Assembly. The Ombudsman should be selected from
a panel of eminent persons of impeccable integrity and should not
be a serving government official.
iii. The Ombudsman should have the authority to investigate cases
and submit reports to competent authorities for taking action.
In case of complaints and grievances regarding corruption and
maladministration against local bodies in general and its elected
functionaries, the local body Ombudsman should send its. report
to the Lokayukta who shall forward it to the Governor of the
State with its recommendations. In case of disagreement with the

Local Governance -An Inspiring Journey into the Future
recommendations of the Ombudsman, the reasons must be placed
in the public domain.
iv. In case of a Metropolitan Corporations, a separate Ombudsman
should be constituted.
v. Time limits may be prescribed for the Ombudsman to complete its
investigations into complaints.
d. In case of complaints and grievances related to infringement of the
law governing elections to these local bodies, leading to suspension/
disqualification of membership, the authority to investigate should lie
. with the State Election Commission who shall send its recommendations
L
to the Governor of the State.
e. In the hierarchy of functionaries under the control ofl ocal bodies, functions
should be delegated to the lowest appropriate functionary in order to
facilitate access to citizens.
f. Each local body should have an in-house mechanism for redressal of
grievances with set norms for attending and responding to citizens'
grievances.
g. For establishing robust social audit norms, every State Government must
take immediate steps to implement the action points suggested in para
5.9.5 of the Report of the Expert Group on 'Planning at the Grass roots
Level'.
h. It should be ensured that suo motu disclosures under the Right to
Information Act, 2005 should not be confined to the seventeen items
provided in Section 4(1) of that Act but other subjects where public interest
exists should also be covered.
i. A suitable mechanism to evolve a system of benchmarking on the basis of
identified performance indicators may be adopted by each State. Assistance
of independent professional evaluators may be availed in this regard.
j. Evaluation tools for assessing the performance of local bodies should be
devised wherein citizens should have a say in the evaluation. Tools such
as 'Citizens' Report Cards' may be introduced to incorporate a feedback
mechanism regarding performance of local bodies.
I
rJ.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
13. (Para 3.9.22) Accounting and Audit
a. The accounting system for the urban local bodies (ULBs) as provided in
the National Municipal Accounts Manual (NMAM) should be adopted by
the State Governments.
b. The financial statements and balance sheet of the urban local bodies should
be audited by an Auditor in the manner prescribed for audit of Government
Companies under the Companies Act, 1956 with the difference that in the
case of audit of these local bodies, the C&AG should prescribe guidelines
for empanelment of the Chartered Accountants and the selection can
be made by the State Governments within these guidelines. The audit
to be done by the Local Fund Audit or the C&AG in discharge of their
responsibilities would be in addition to such an audit.
c. The existing arrangement between the Comptroller & Auditor General
of India and the State Governments with regard to providing Technical
Guidance and Supervision (TGS) over maintenance of accounts and audit
ofPRIs and ULBs should be institutionalised by making provisions in the
State Laws governing local bodies.
d. It should be ensured that the audit and accounting standards and formats
for Panchayats are prepared in a way which is simple and comprehensible
to the elected representatives of the PRISe
e. The independence of the Director, Local Fund Audit (DLFA) or any
other agency responsible for audit of accounts of local bodies should
be institutionalised by making the office independent of the State
administration. The head of this body should be appointed by the State
Government from a panel vetted by the C&AG.
f. Release of Finance Commission Grants to the local bodies may be made
conditional on acceptance of arrangements regarding technical supervision
of the C&AG over audit of accounts of local bodies.
g. Audit reports on local bodies should be placed before the State Legislature
and these reports should be discussed by a separate committee of the State
Legislature on the same lines as the Public Accounts Committee (PAC).
h. Access to relevant information/records to DLFAldesignated authority for
conducting audit or the C&AG should be ensured by incorporating suitable
provisions in the State Laws governing local bodies.

Local Governance -An Inspiring Journey into the Future
i. Each State may ensure that the local bodies have adequate capacity to match
with the standards of accounting and auditing.
j. The system of outcome auditing should be gradually introduced. For this
purpose the key indicators of performance in respect of a government
scheme will need to be decided and announced in advance.
k. To complement institutional audit arrangements, adoption and monitoring
of prudent financial management practices in the local bodies should be
institutionalised by the State Governments by legislating an appropriate
law on Fiscal Responsibility for local Bodies.
14. (Para 3.10.1.2) Information and Communication Technology
a. Information and Communication Technology should be utilised by the
local governments in process simplification, enhancing transparency and
accountability and providing delivery of services through single window.
15. (Para 3.10.2.8) Space Technology
a. Space technology should be harnessed by the local bodies to create an
information base and for providing services.
b. Local governments should become one point service centres for providing
various web based and satellite based services. This would however require
capacity building in the local governments.
16. (Para 4.1.3.5) Size of the Gram Panchayat
a. States should ensure that as far as possible Gram Panchayats should be of
an appropriate size which would make them viable units of self-governance
and also enable effective popular participation. This exercise will need to
take into account local geographical and demographic conditions.
17. (Para 4.1.4.4) Ward Sabha -its Necessity
a. Wherever there are large Gram Panchayats, States should take steps to
constitute Ward Sabhas which will exercise in such Panchayats, certain
powers and functions of the Gram Sabha and of the Gram Panchayat as
may be entrusted to them.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
18. (Para 4.1.5.4) Personnel Management in PRIs
a. Panchayats should have power to recruit personnel and to regulate their
service conditions subject to such laws and standards as laid down by
the State Government. Evolution of this system should not be prolonged
beyond three years. Until then, the Panchayats may draw upon, for defined
periods, staff from departments/agencies of the State Government, on
deputation.
b. In all States, a detailed review of the staffing pattern and systems, with a
zero-based approach to PRI staffing, may be undertaken over the next one
year in order to implement the policy of PRI ownership of staff. The Zila
Parishads, particularly, should be associated with this exercise.
19. (Para 4.1.6.8) PRIs and the State Government
a. The provisions in some State Acts regarding approval of the budget of
a Panchayat by the higher tier or any other State authority should be
abolished.
b. State Governments should not have the power to suspend or rescind
any resolution passed by the PRIs or take action against the elected
representatives on the ground of abuse of office, corruption etc. or to
supersede/ dissolve the Panchayats. In all such cases, the powers to
investigate and recommend action should lie with the local Ombudsman
who will send his report through the Lokayukta to the Governor.
c. For election infringements and other election related complaints, the
authority to investigate should be the State Election Commission who will
send its recommendations to the Governor.
d. If, on any occasion, the State Government feels that there is need to take
immediate action against the Panchayats or their elected representatives
on one or more of the grounds mentioned in 'b' above, it should place the
records before the Ombudsman for urgent investigation. In all such cases,
the Ombudsman will send his report through Lokayukta to the Governor
in a specified period.
e. In all cases of disagreements with the recommendations made by the local
Ombudsman/Lokayukta, the reasons will need to be placed in the public
domain.

Local Governance -An Inspiring Journey into the Future
20. (Para 4.1.7.8) Position ofParastatals
a. Parastatals should not be allowed to undermine the authority of the
PRISe
b. There is no need for continuation of the District Rural Development Agency
(D RDA). Following the lead taken by Kerala, Karnataka and West Bengal,
the DRDAs in other States also should be merged with the respective
District Panchayats (Zila Parishad). Similar action should be taken for the
District Water and Sanitation Committee (DWSC).
c. The District Health Society (D HS) and FFDA should be restructured to
have an organic relationship with the PRISe
d. The Union and State Governments should 'normally not setup special
committees outside the PRISe However, if such specialised committees are
required to be set-up because of professional or technical requirements,
and if their activities coincide with those listed in the Eleventh Schedule,
they should, either function under the overall supervision and guidance of
the Panchayats or their relationship with the PRIs should be worked out
in consultation with the concerned level of Panchayat.
e. Community level bodies should not be created by decisions taken at higher
levels. If considered necessary the initiative for their creation should come
from below and they should be accountable to PRIse
21. (Para 4.2.3.10) Activity Mapping
a. States must undertake comprehensive activity mapping with regard to
all the matters mentioned in the Eleventh Schedule. This process should
cover all aspects of the subject viz; planning, budgeting and provisioning
of finances. The State Government should set-up a task force to complete
this work within one year.
b. The Union Government will also need to take similar action with regard
to Centrally Sponsored Schemes.
22. (Para 4.2.4.2) Devolving Regulatory Functions to the Panchayats
a. Rural policing, enforcement of building byelaws, issue of birth, death,
caste and residence certificates, issue ofv oter identity cards, enforcement of

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
regulations pertaining to weights and measures are some of the regulatory
functions which should be entrusted to Panchayats. Panchayats may also
be empowered to manage small endowments and charities. This could be
done by suitably modifying the laws relating to charitable endowments.
b. Regulatory functions which can be performed by the Panchayats should
be identified and devolved on a continuous basis.
23. (Para 4.3.5.3) Resource Generation by the Panchayats
a. A comprehensive exercise needs to be taken up regarding broadening and
deepening of the revenue base of local governments. This exercise will have
to simultaneously look into four major aspects ofr esource mobilisation viz.
(i) potential for taxation (ii) fixation of realistic tax rates (iii) widening of
tax base and (iv) improved collection. Government may incorporate this
as one of the terms of reference of the Thirteenth Finance Commission.
b. All common property resources vested in the Village Panchayats should
be identified, listed and made productive for revenue generation.
c. State Governments should by law expand the tax domain of Panchayats.
Simultaneously it should be made obligatory for the Panchayats to levy
taxes in this tax domain.
d. At the higher level, the local bodies could be encouraged to run/ manage
utilities such as transport, water supply and power distribution on a sound
financial basis and viability.
e. The expanded tax domain could interalia include levies on registration of
cattle, restaurants, large shops, hotels, cybercafes and tourist buses etc.
f. The role of State Governments should be limited to prescribing a band of
rates for these taxes and levies.
g. PRIs should be given a substantial share in the royalty from minerals
collected by the State Government. This aspect should be considered by
the SFCs while recommending grants to the PRISe
h. State Governments should consider empowering the PRIs to collect cess
on the royalty from mining activities. In addition they should also be

Local Governance -An Inspiring journey into the Future
given power to impose and collect additional! special surcharge from such
activities (mines! minerals!p lants).
i. Innovative steps taken by the States and the PRIs to augment their resources
must be rewarded by linking Central Finance Commission and State
Finance Commission grants to such measures. States may reward better
performing PRIs through special incentives.
j. In the tax domain assigned to PRIs, Village Panchayats must have
primary authority over taxation. However, where such taxation has inter
Panchayat remifications, the local government institutions at higher levels
- Intermediate Panchayat and Zila parishad could be given concurrent
powers subject to a ceiling. Whenever a tax/fee is imposed by the higher
tier, such taxes should be collected by the concerned Village Panchayats.
24. (Para 4.3.7.5) Transfer of Funds to the Panchayats
a. Except for the specifically tied, major Centrally Sponsored Schemes and
special purpose programmes of the States, all other allocations to the
Panchayati Raj Institutions should be in the form of untied funds. The
allocation order should contain only a brief description of broad objectives
and expected outcomes.
b. State Governments should modify their rules of financial business to
incorporate the system of separate State and District sector budgets, the
later indicating district-wise allocations.
c. There should be a separate Panchayat sector line in the State budget.
d. State Governments should make use of the software on "fund transfer to
Panchayats" prepared by the Union Panchayati Raj Ministry for speedy
transfer of funds.
e. State Governments should release funds to the Panchayats in such a manner
that these institutions get adequate time to use the allocation during the year
itself. The fund release could be in the form of equally spaced instalments.
It could be done in two instalments; one at the beginning of the financial
year and the other by the end of September of that year.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
25. (Para 4.3.8.2) PRIs and Access to Credit
a. For their infrastructure needs, the Panchayats should be encouraged to
borrow from banks/financial institutions. The role of the State Government
should remain confined only to fixing the limits of borrowing.
26. (Para 4.3.9.5) Local Area Development Schemes
a. The How of funds for all public development schemes in rural areas should
be exclusively routed through Panchayats. Local Area Development
Authorities, Regional Development Boards and other organization having
similar functions should immediately be wound up and their functions
and assets transferred to the appropriate level of the Panchayat.
b. As recommended by the Commission in its report on "Ethics in
Governance", the Commission reiterates that the schemes ofMPLAD and
MLALAD should be abolished.
27. (Para 4.4.7) Rural Development
a. The Commission while endorsing the views of the Expert Group on
Planning at the Grass roots Level as given at Annexure-IV(2) to this Report,
recommends that there has to be territorial/ jurisdictional/functional
convergence in implementing Centrally Sponsored Schemes.
b. The centrality ofPRIs in these schemes must be ensured if they are to deal
with the matters listed in the Eleventh Schedule.
(i) In all such schemes, the GramlWard Sabha should be accepted as the
most important!c utting edge participatory body for implementation,
monitoring and audit of the programmes.
(ii) Programme committees dealing with functions under the Eleventh
Schedule and working exclusively in rural areas need to be subsumed
by the respective panchayats and their standing bodies. Some others
having wider roles may need to be restructured to have an organic
relationship with the Panchayats.
(iii) In the programmes, where the activities percolate to areas and
habitations below a PanchayatlWard level, a small local centre
committee should be formed to support these activities. This Centre

Local Governance - An Inspiring Journey into the Future
committee should be only a deliberative body with responsibility
to provide regular feedback to the Gram SabhalWard Sabha and be
accountable to it.
c. The Ministry sanctioning the programme should issue only broad guidelines
leaving scope for implementational Hexibility so as to ensure local relevance
through active involvement of the Panchayats.
d. All Centrally Sponsored programmes should have properly demarcated
goals and there should be a mechanism to assess their socio-economic
impact over a given period of time. The NSSO may be suitably strengthened
and assigned this task.
28. (Para 4.4.8.6) Information, Education and Communication - IEC
a. A multi-pronged approach using different modes of communication like
the print media, the visual media, electronic media, folk art and plays
etc. should be adopted to disseminate information and create awareness
about Panchayati Raj. It should be ensured that there is a convergence in
approach to achieve synergies and maximise reach.
b. The Union Ministry of Informa~ion and Broadcasting should devise a
mechanism in consultation with the Union Ministry of Panchayati Raj,
Ministry of Rural Development and Ministry of Agriculture and other
concerned Ministries for effectively implementing this activity.
c. Rural broadcasting should become a full-Hedged independent activity
of the All India Radio. Rural broadcasting units should be based in the
districts and the broadcasts should be primarily in the locallanguage(s)
prevalent in the district. These programmes should focus on issues related
to Panchayati Raj Institutions, rural development, agriculture, Right to
Information and relevant ones on public health, sanitation, education
etc.
29. (Para 4.5.4) Rule of Panchayats in Delivery of Services
a. In terms oft he Eleventh Schedule oft he Constitution, local level activities of
elementary education, preventive and promotive health care, water supply,
sanitation, environmental improvement and nutrition should immediately
be transferred to the appropriate tiers of the PRISe

Reports of the dministrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
b. State Governments need to prepare an overarching Service Delivery Policy
outlining the framework within which each department could lay down
detailed guidelines for preparation of Service Delivery Plans.
30. (Para 4.5.5.6) Resource Centre at the Village Level
a. Steps should be taken to set up Information and Communic tion
Technology (lCT) and space Technology enabled Resource Centres at the
Village and Intermediate Panchayat levels for local resource mapping and
generation of local information base.
b. These Resource Centres should also be used for documenting local
traditional knowledge and heritage.
c. Capacity building should be attempted at the local level by shifting
the currently-available post school generalistic education to a skill and
technology based system having focus on farm & animal husbandry
practices, computer applications, commercial cropping and soil and water
management.
31. (Para 4.6.1.2.3) Local Government in the Fifth Schedule Areas
a. The Union and State legislations that impinge on provisions of PESA
should be immediately modified so as to bring them in conformity with
the Act.
b. If any State exhibits reluctance in implementing the provisions of PESA,
Government of India may consider issuing specific directions to it in
accordance with the powers given to it under Proviso 3 of Part A of the
Fifth Schedule.
32. (Para 4.6.1.4.4) Effective Implementation of PESA
a. Regular Annual Reports from the Governor of every State as stipulated
under the Fifth Schedule, Part A (3) of the Constitution must be given due
importance. Such reports should be published immediately and placed in
the public domain.
b. In order to ensure that women are not marginalised in meetings of the
Gram Sabha, there should be a provision in the PESA Rules and Guidelines
that the quorum of a Gram Sabha meeting will be acceptable only when
out of the members present, at least thirty-three per cent are women.

Local Governance - An Inspiring Journey into the Future
c. Each State should constitute a group to look into strengthening of the
I
l administrative machinery in Fifth Schedule areas. This group will need to
go into the issues of (i) special administrative arrangements, (ii) provision
of hardship pay, (iii) other incentives, and (iv) preferential treatment in
accommodation and education. All expenditure in this regard should be
treated as charged expenditure under Article 275 of the Constitution.
33. (Para 4.6.1.5.3) Effictive Implementation of the Tribal Sub-Plan (TSP)
a. Keeping in view the inadequacy of the past efforts, State Governments
should form a special planning unit (consisting of professionals and
technically qualified personnel) to prepare their Tribal-Sub Plan.
b. A certain portion of the allocation under TSP should be made non-Iapsable
on the pattern of the Non Lapsable Central Pool of Resources (NLCPR)
created for the North-Eastern States. A special cell may be set up in the
Ministry of Tribal Affairs to monitor expenditure from this fund.
c) The government may consider preparing an impact assessment report every
year with respect to the States covered under PESA. This exercise may be
assigned to a national level institute which has done similar work in the past
e.g. National Council for Applied Economic Research (NCAER), National
Institute of Public Finance and Policy (NIPFP), National Sample Survey
Organisation (NSSO) or some other suitable agency. This agency will rate
the performance of the State on predetermined indices.
34. (Para 5.1.4) Urbanisation and Growth
a. A new National Commission on Urbanisation should be constituted by
Government to suggest measures to deal with the rapid urbanisation,
including the large cities and bring about more balanced and efficient
urbanisation in the country.
35. (Para 5.2.2.4) Proposed Basic Structure -Ward Committees and Area Sabhas
a. Government may consider the adoption of a common categorisation of
urban bodies across the country to improve clarity in their definition
so as to assist a systematic planning process and devolution of funds.
A categorisation on the lines proposed given in Table 5.6 could be
adopted.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
b. There should be three tiers of administration in urban local governments,
except in the case of Town Panchayats, where the middle level would not
be required. The tiers should be:
i. Municipal Council/Corporation (by whatever name it is called);
ii. Ward Committees; and
iii. Area Committees or Sabhas.
c. Each Area Sabha comprising all citizens in one or two (or more) polling
station areas, should elect, once in five years, a small Committee of
Representatives. The Committee of Representatives would elect one person
who would chair the meetings of the Area Sabha and would represent
the Area Sabha in the relevant Ward Committee. The State may, by law,
prescribe the procedure and other details for such election;
d. Ward Committees should be set up in every Ward/Corporator's Division,
The present system of having more than one ward in a Ward Committee
needs to be given up;
e. Ward Committees need to be given legitimate functions which can be
handled at that level. These functions could include street lighting,
sanitation, water supply, drainage, road maintenance, maintenance of
school buildings, maintenance of local hospitals/dispensaries, local
markets, parks, playgrounds, etc;
f. Funds allocated for the functions entrusted to the Ward Committee should
be transferred en-bloc to the Ward Committee. The budget proposed by
the Ward Committee in respect to the functions allotted to it should be
taken into account in formulating the overall municipal budget;
g. Meetings of the Ward Committee should be widely publicised to ensure
maximum citizens' participation;
h. Ward Committees should be given a share of the property taxes collected
from the ward, depending on the locality;
i. The allocation of functional responsibilities between the tiers must be
clearly spelt out. While doing so, the principle of subsidiarity should be

Local Governance - An Inspiring Journey into the Future
followed. Broadly, the Area Sabha should perform functions similar to the
Gram Sabha such as prioritising developmental activities and identifying
beneficiaries under various schemes; and
j. A process of activity mapping similar to the one taken up for PRIs should
be carried out for all ULBs within one year.
36. (Para 5.2.3.2) Zonal System for Large Cities
a. Zonal offices with all administrative powers delegated to them may be set
up immediately in Metropolitan Corporations and Municipal Corporations
and become the main point of contact for people in respect of services
and amenities. One zone for every five lakh (or less) population could be
considered. Similar zonal offices should also be set up in other big cities
within the next three years.
37. (Para 5.2.4.3) The Office of the Mayor/Chairperson
a. The functions of chairing the municipal council and exercising executive
authority in urban local government should be combined in the same
functionary i.e. Chairperson or Mayor.
b. The Chairperson/Mayor should be directly elected by popular mandate
through a city-wide election.
c. The Chairperson/Mayor will be the chief executive of the municipal body.
Executive power should vest in that functionary.
d. The elected Council should perform the functions of budget approval,
oversight and framing of regulations and policies.
e. In municipal corporations and metropolitan cities, the Mayor should
appoint the Mayor's 'Cabinet'. The members of the Cabinet should be
chosen by the Mayor from the elected corporators. The Mayor's Cabinet
shall not exceed 10 per cent of the strength of the elected Corporation or
fifteen, whichever is higher. The Cabinet will exercise executive authority
on matters entrusted to them by the Mayor, under his overall control and
direction.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
38. (Para 5.2.5.4) Management Structure of Urban Local Governments
a. The Mayor should be the Chief Executive of the municipal body while the
Commissioner should perform the functions delegated to him/her.
b. The responsibility for selection and appointment of the Commissioner
and other staff may be given to the Metropolitan Corporations within a
period of two years. For other bodies this may be done within three years.
States should, however, by law, lay down the procedure and conditions
of such appointment. For the duration that the Commissioner/Chief
Officer continues to be drawn from the State Government, selection should
be made by the Mayor from out of a panel of names sent by the State
Government.
c. The Directorates of Municipal Administration, wherever they exist, should
be abolished. In case there are State-wide cadres of municipal employees,
no fresh appointments to these may be made and the employees should
be absorbed in municipal bodies through a due process.
39. (Para 5.3.3.8) Property Tax Reforms
a. State Governments should ensure that all local bodies switch over to the
'unit area method' or 'capital value method' for assessment of property tax
in a time-bound manner.
b. The categories of exemptions from property tax need to be reviewed and
minimised.
c. In order to ensure that unauthorised constructions do not escape the tax
net, State laws should stipulate that levy of tax on any property would not,
in itself, confer any right of ownership, in case the property is found to be
constructed in violation of any law or regulation.
d. Tax details for all properties should be placed in the public domain to
avoid collusion between the assessing authority and the property owner.
e. The State law should also provide for tax on properties belonging to
the municipal authorities which are given on lease, to be payable by the
occupants.

Local Governance - An Inspiring Journey into the Future
f. The law should provide for the levy of service charge on properties belonging
to the Union and State Governments. This service charge should be in lieu
of various services provided such as solid waste management, sanitation,
maintenance of roads, streedighting and general civic amenities.
g. A periodic physical verification of the properties and the taxes levied on
them should be carried out in each municipal area by a separate wing
direcdy under the control of the Chief Executive.
h. A computerised data base of all properties using GIS mapping should be
prepared for all municipal areas.
i. Randomly selected cases of assessment should be audited by the government
auditors as is done by C&AG in case of Union taxes.
40. (Para 5.3.4.2) Octroi
a. Octroi should be abolished, but the States should evolve mechanisms to
compensate the local governments for the loss of revenue caused by such
abolition.
41. (Para 5.3.5.2) Other Taxes
a. The following principles should be followed while administering all
taxes:
i. The manner of determination of tax should be made totally
transparent and objective;
ii. As far as possible, all levies may be based on self declaration of the
tax payer but this should be accompanied by stringent penalties in
case of fraud or suppression of facts by the tax payer;
iii. The cost of tax collection and of compliance should be reduced to a
minimum;
iv. There should be an independent unit under the Chief Executive to
monitor the collection of all taxes; and
I ._
v. The appeal against orders of assessing officers should lie with an
independent quasi-judicial authority.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
b. Article 276(2) may be amended to enhance the upper ceiling on Profession
Tax and this ceiling should be reviewed periodically.
42. (Para 5.3.6.8) Non Tax Revenues
a. A significant portion of grants to the municipalities must be linked with
their own efforts at resource raising.
b. An impact study should be carried out for all major developments in the
city. A congestion charge and!o r betterment levy in relation to such projects
may be levied wherever warranted.
c. The power to impose fines for violation of civic laws should be given to
municipal authorities. The relevant laws may be suitably modified.
d. The fines prescribed for civic offences need to be enhanced. The amount of
fine should be regulated by Rules under the law so that it could be revised
periodically without the necessity of an amendment to the law.
43. (Para 5.3.7.7) Borrowings
a. The limits of borrowings for various municipal bodies in a State may be
fixed on the recommendation of the SFC.
b. Municipal bodies should be encouraged to borrow without Government
Guarantees. However, for small municipalities, pooled financing
mechanisms will have to be put in place by the State Government.
c. The capacity oft he municipalities to handle legal and financial requirements
of responsible borrowing must be enhanced.
44. (Para 5.3.8.7) Leveraging Land as a Resource
a. Municipal bodies should have a periodically updated database of its
properties. IT tools like GIS should be used for this purpose. This database
should be in the public domain;
b. Land banks available with the municipalities as well as with the
development authorities should be leveraged for generating resources for

Local Governance - An Inspiring Journey into the Future
the municipalities. However, such resources should be used exclusively to
finance infrastructure and capital expenditure and not to meet recurring
costs.
c. Until the development authorities are merged with urban local bodies, a
proportion of the revenue realised by such agencies from the sale of land,
say, 25%, should be made available to the municipalities for meeting their
infrastructure financing needs.
d. The respective municipal laws should provide that any built up property
of municipal bodies shall not be given on rent/lease without following a
competitive process. Such a lease period shall not exceed five years.
45. (Para 5.4.2.10) Regulatory Services
a. A time-bound programme for updating and simplification of all regulatory
provisions relating to the ULBs should be made mandatory. Each State
Government should create a task force to examine and suggest simplification
of procedures in local governments. This task force could also suggest steps
to be taken to reduce discretion and bring objectivity in the field offices of
local governments. The city municipal corporations could undertake such
an exercise on their own.
b. All service providers in cities should be brought under one umbrella by
establishing 'one stop service centres. This could be completed within two
years in all cities. Call centres, electronic kiosks, web based services and
other tools of modern technology should be used by all ULBs to bring
speed, transparency and accountability into delivery of services to the
citizens.
c. Citizens' charters in all Urban Local Bodies should specify time limits for
approvals relating to regulatory services such as licenses and permits and
these should be scrupulously adhered to. The charter should also specify
the relief available to the citizens in case of non adherence.
d. A system of self certification by registered architects for issue of building
permits should be introduced in all ULBs with immediate effect, to start
with, for individual residential units.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
46. (Para 5.4.3.1.5) Creating a Responsive Institutional Framework
a. The local government should be responsible for providing civic amenities
in its jurisdiction.
b. In respect of all downstream activities of a particular State utility, as soon
as it enters the geographical and administrative boundary of an Urban
Local Body, the Government utility/parastatal should become accountable
to the ULB.
47. (Para 5.4.3.2.8) Water Supply
a. Urban Local Bodies should be given responsibility for water supply and
distribution in their territorial jurisdictions whether based on their own
source or on collaborative arrangements with parastatals and other service
providers.
b. Metropolitan Corporations may be given responsibility for the entire water
supply programme from development to distribution. For other urban
local bodies, a phased transfer of responsibilities for management of the
distribution networks within their territorial jurisdiction while leaving
source development to the parastatal agency would appear to be the most
feasible approach.
c. State Finance Commissions may be entrusted with the task of developing
suitable normative parameters for different classes of local governments
for arriving at optimum tariff structure.
d. Municipal bodies must focus on increasing operational efficiencies -
through reduction in pilferage, improving efficiency of staff and use of
technology.
e. The municipal bodies should meter all water connenction within a time
frame. Installing a hierarchy of metering system could help in identifying
pilferage. Payment of water charges should be made hassle free through
use of Information Technology. As far as possible all water connections
should be metered, and if necessary targeted subsidy should be provided
to the poorest sections.

Local Governance - An Inspiring Journey into the Future
f. Infrastructure development plans for water supp y s ould be integrated
ith the CDPs.
g. Municipal bye-laws should provide incentives for adoption of water
harvesting measures and recycling ofw aste water for non-potable purposes.
In larger cities, non-potable water (recycled treated water) should be used
for industries.
48. ( ara 5.4.3.3.9) Sewerage Management
a. Sanitation, as a matter of hygiene and public health, must be given due
priority and emphasis in all urban areas. In all towns, advance action for
laying down adequate infrastructure should be taken to avoid insufficiency
of services.
b. Each municipal body should prepare a time bound programme for
providing sewerage facilities in slum areas. This should be brought into
action through appropriate allocation in the annual budget. Local bodies
may impose a cess on the property tax or development charges in order
to raise resources for expansion and c~pacity enhancement of the existing
sewerage systems. In order to motivate the local governments to generate
additional resources for sewerage management, matching grants may be
provided by the Union and State Governments.
c. Community participation and co-production of services should be
encouraged by municipal bodies. This should be supplemented by
awareness generation.
A separate user charge should be introduced in all municipalities, even as a
minimum levy, for sanitation and sewerage, as distinct from water charges.
State Finance Commissions may be entrusted with the task of developing
suitable normative parameters for different classes of local governments
for arriving at optimum user charges.
49. (Para 5.4.3.5.3) Solid Waste Management and Scavenging
a. In all towns and cities with a population above one lakh, the possibility of
taking up public private partnership projects for collection and disposal of
garbage may be explored. This should, however, be preceded by development
of capacity of the municipal bodies to manage such contracts.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
b. Municipal bye-laws/rules should provide for segregation of waste into
definite categories based on its manner of final disposal.
c. Special solid waste management charges should be levied on units
generating high amount of solid waste.
d. Extensive surveys should be carried out by the State Governments to identify
manual scavengers and estimate the number of dry latrines in existence
within six months.
e. Following the survey, adequate funds should be allocated for the purpose
of eradication of manual scavenging within one year.
f. Central Assistance to States Annual Plan should be tied to eradication of
manual scavenging. Funds allocated under the JNNURM should also be
linked to it.
50. (Para 5.4.3.6.4) Power Utilites and Municipal Bodies
a. Municipal bodies should be encouraged to take responsibility of power
distribution in their areas. This, however, should be done after adequate
capacity building in these organisations.
b. Municipal building bye-laws should incorporate power conservation
measures.
c. Municipal bodies should coordinate the layout plans for the distribution
networks of power and other utilities.
51. (Para 5.4.4.3) Services for Human Development
a. There has to be a shift in emphasis in the crucial service delivery sectors
of education and health from centralised control to decentralised action,
from accountability to the State department to accountability to the local
communities and from employment guarantee to service guarantee.
b. It is necessary that all schools are made functionally self-sufficient, in as
much as basic facilities and classroom requirements are provided in all
urban schools within the next two years.
c. The municipalities, especially the larger ones, should seek the help of
NGOs, the corporate sector and individual volunteers for assistance in
I ..

Local Governance - An Inspiring Journey into the Future
running schools. Indeed, it would be useful to initiate a voluntary service
element in our social sector to improve service delivery.
d. The trend in urban areas to shift towards private healthcare needs to be seen
as an opportunity by the City authorities to concentrate on public health
as distinct from clinical services, and on preventive and not only curative
aspects of health care.
e. Institution specific standards should be prescribed for schools and hospitals
and third party assessments carried out to monitor performance in service
delivery. Performance based incentives should be prescribed at all levels
by breaking salary ceilings to guarantee service outcomes and linking
permanence in service to performance.
f. Recruitment for hospitals and schools should be made to an institutionl
Society, moving away from non accountable State level recruitment.
g. Local bodies should ensure convergence among health systems, sanitation
facilities and drinking water facilities. Primary level public health
institutions in urban areas should be managed by the urban local bodies.
h. For all services provided by local governments there is need to develop a
set of performance indicators. The concerned Ministry should lay down
broad guidelines for this purpose. Thereafter, the State Governments could
lay down norms for this purpose.
i. The concerned Mini~try should maintain a State-wise database about the
performance ofv arious service delivery systems. Similarly, the State should
have a database for such services covering all municipal bodies.
52. (Para 5.4.5.15) Urban Transport Management
a. Urban Transport Authorities, to be called Unified Metropolitan Transport
Authorities in the Metropolitan Corporations, should be set up in cities
with population over one million within one year, for coordinated planning
and implementation of urban transport solutions with overriding priority
to public transport.
b. UMTAs/UTAs should be given statutory powers to regulate all modes of
public transport, decide on complementary routes for each operator, and

R po t~ of the Administrive Reforms Commissio - A Summar
fix fares as well as service standards, etc. In addition, UMTAs/UTAs sho d
be given financial powers and resources to give or recommend financial
support, where necessary, to operators on unviable routes.
c. Integration of land use with transport planning should be made mandatory
for all ULBs as well as planning bodies such as the D PCs and MPCs.
d. Demand for transportation in cities should be managed by adopting
demand control measures like:
i. Imposition of congestion levies;
ii. Pedestrianisation of certain zones; and
iii. Reserving access to certain areas only through public transport.
e. Revitalisation of public transport services in cities should be taken up as
priority projects under JNNURM and by tapping other sources of revenue
as has been done in Indore and other cities. The aim should be to promote
well structured public-private initiatives for modernising and redefining
public transport. At the same time the efficiency oft he existing State owned
transport systems needs to be improved.
f. Public transport systems should generally be multi-modal. The modes
should be based on economic viability. High capacity public transport
systems like metro rail or high capacity bus systems should form the
backbone in mega cities spplemented by other modes like a bus system.
g. While building transport infrastructure in cities, it must be ensured that
the needs of the pedestrians, the elderly, the physically challenged and
other users of non motorised means of transport are adequately met.
53. (Para 5.4.6.14) JNNURM -A Reform Process
a. On the basis of projections, the total investment needed for urban renewal
appears to be far in excess oft he funds available. Government must find ways
and means to fund this flagship programme - JNNURM - adequately.
b. The conditionalities linking reforms with fund flows should be enforced as
per the schedules agreed between the ULBs and the Government of India
without exceptions or relaxations.

Local Governance - An Inspiring Journey into the Future
c. There should be sectoral allocations for sanitation and solid waste
management.
d. Capacity building measures should not be confined to only the selected
towns and should be available for all citiesltowns.
54. (Para 5.4.7.2) A Critical and Urgent Area of Reform - Real Estate
a. There is urgent need to bring in legislation to regulate the Real Estate sector
on the lines mentioned in paragraph 5.4.7.1.
55. (Para 5.5.2.9) Re-Forming Mega Cities
a. Public-Private Partnership projects for redevelopment of inner city areas
need to be encouraged through a transparent and well structured regulatory
regime of incentives and penalties.
56. (Para 5.5.3.4) Developing 25-30 World Class Mega Cities in India
a. Government should prepare an acti.on plan to redevelop about 25-30 cities
(having a population of more than a million) to achieve international level
amenities and services as modern megacities of the future.
b. Reform linked initiatives like JNNURM are an opportunity to complement
physical development with enforcement of civic laws and general law
enforcement in order to usher in genuine civic regeneration in our cities.
In addition to infrastructure development in our cities, such large capital
investment programs for city development should be invariably linked
with a zero tolerance strategy towards civic violations.
c. As mentioned in the Commission's report on 'Public Order', a "zero
tolerance strategy" can be institutionalised in the enforcement departments
ofl ocal bodies by using modern technology to monitor the levels and trends
in various types of civic offences. These can then be linked to a system of
incentives and penalties to hold accountable the officials working in these
departments. On the spot fines and other summary penalties should be used
to inculcate civic discipline and deter and prevent minor civic violations
that are at present largely ignored.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
57. (Para 5.5.4.7) Authorities for Metropolitan Corporations
a. As recommended in the Commission's report on 'Public Order', a
Metropolitan Police Authority should be set up in all cities with a
population above one million to oversee community policing, improve
police-citizen interface, suggect ways to improve quality of policing,
approve annual police plans and review the working of such plans.
b. As recommended in para 5.4.5.15 of this Report, a Unified Metropolitan
Transport Authority should be set up in an all mega cities for coordinated
planning and implementation of urban transport solutions with overriding
priority to public transport.
c. For all Metropolitan Corporations, which may be defined as cities with a
population exceeding 5 million, MPCs may be constituted with the Chief
Minister as the Chairperson in order to give the required impetus to the
process of planning for such urban agglomerations.
d. In all cities with a population exceeding five million, a Metropolitan
Environment Authority needs to be set up with powers delegated by
the State Government from the State Pollution Control Board and
related authorities. It should be vested with adequate powers for urban
environmental management within the city limits.
58. (Para 5.6.2.3) Beneficiary Identification
a. An exhaustive survey to identify the urban poor should be carried out within
one year. The parameters to be used for such identification should be simple
and easily comprehensible, allowing objective measurement without the
use of discretion. The basic parameters should be spelt out at the national
level. The identification should be based on a door-to-door survey with the
survey teams including at least one person from the Area Sabha concerned.
The urban poor so identified may be issued multi-utility identity cards for
availing benefits under all poverty alleviation programmes.
59. (Para 5.6.3.2.5) Measures for Poverty Alleviation - Employment
a. After identifying the urban poor through surveys, a mission mode approach
would need to be adopted for alleviating urban poverty in a time-bound
and systematic manner. The urban local bodies may also have their own

Local Governance - An Inspiring Journey into the Future
poverty alleviation schemes with adequate backward and forward linkages
converging with the other poverty alleviation schemes.
b. The thrust of the urban poverty alleviation schemes should be on
upgradation of skills and training. Training institutes may be set up
on the lines of RUDSETIs for imparting training to the urban poor for
self employment. These institutes could also help in developing wage
employment related skills.
c. In case of setting up of micro-enterprises, the urban poverty alleviation
schemes should be flexible in selecting projects and providing financial
assistance.
d. To maximise the benefits of micro-finance, formation of Self-Help Groups
(SHGs) needs to be encouraged. Institutions and NGOs with good track
record should be encouraged to promote SHGs for availing micro
finance.
60. (Para 5.6.3.3.4) Measures for Poverty Alleviation - Literacy
a. The education plan should form an integral part of the development plan
for the city.
61. (Para 5.6.3.4.2) Measures for Poverty Alleviation - Health and Nutrition
a. Urban Local Bodies should adopt the concept of 'Primary Health Care, for
providing health and medical facilities to the urban poor, particularly to
women and children with the help of auxiliary health staff. These should
specifically cater to the population living in slum areas.
62. (Para 5.6.3.6.3) Slums in Urban Areas and Land Use Reservation for the Poor
a. There has to be total redevelopment of slum areas. While redeveloping,
it should be ensured that adequate provision has been made for schools,
health centres, sanitation etc.
b. For slum redevelopment the approach suggested in para 5.6.3.5.11 may
be considered while formulating policy or specific schemes.
c. It is necessary to earmark and reserve a certain percentage of land projects
in each town and city for the urban poor. If a construction cannot allocate

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
housing for the poor, the developer must, at his own cost, provide suitable
housing in any other appropriate place acceptable to the authorities.
d. A detailed programme for the provision of night shelters needs to be
drawn up in all cities, beginning with large cities having Metropolitan
and Municipal Corporations, for implementation.
63. (Para 5.7.2.12) The Town and Country Planning Act(s)
a. The City Development Plan (CDP) and zoning regulations once approved
should remain in force for ten years. No authority should normally have
any power to change the CDP.
b. Infrastructure plans should be made an integral part of the City
Development Plan (CD P) in order to ensure that urban planning in cities
\ become a truly holistic exercise.
'v
c. The existing system of enforcement of building regulations needs to be
revised. It should be professionalised by licensing architects and structural
engineers for assessment ofs tructures and for certification ofs afe buildings.
The units of local bodies dealing with enforcement of building bye-laws
and zoning regulations also need to be strengthened.
d. Prevention of Disaster Management must find a prominent place in spatial
planning. Specific guidelines need to be framed by the Ministry of Urban
Development. These should be addressed by including them in the zoning
regulations and building bye-laws.
e. The standards prescribed by BIS for disaster resistant buildings should be
available in the public domain, free of cost. They should also be posted on
websites of the concerned government agencies to promote compliance.
64. (Para 5.7.5.3) Development Areas
a. In respect of all townships and satellite towns developed under the
development authorities, it should be ensured that as soon as the
development process is completed, jurisdiction over the township should
be transferred to the local bodies.

Local Governance - An Inspiring Journey into the Future
65. (Para 5.7.6.5) Private Townships
a. Private townships and gated communities must be placed under the
jurisdiction of the concerned local body and subject to its laws, rules and
bye-laws. However, they can have autonomy for provision of infrastructure
and services within their precincts and!o r for collection of taxes and charges
(para 5.7.7.2 )
b. The establishment of private, gated colonies must be allowed only within
the broad parameters of the larger regional urban planning process where
the development plans must clearly indicate spaces for private expansion
make mandatory provision for low cost housing and should be integrated
with the availability of infrastructure services.
66. (Para 5.7.7.4) Special Economic Zones (SEZs)
a. As in the case of private townships, concerned local bodies should have full
jurisdiction with regard to enforcement of local civic laws in the SEZs.
b. SEZs may be given autonomy for provision of infrastructure and amenities
in the SEZ area. A formula for sharing the resources raised in the SEZ area
needs to be developed.
67. (Para 5.8.4) Urban Local Bodies and the State Government
a. Municipal governments should have full autonomy over the functions!
activities devolved to them.
b. If the State Government feels that there are circumstances that make it
necessary to suspend or rescind any resolution passed by the Urban Local
Bodies or to dissolve or supersede them, it should not do so unless the
matter has been referred to the concerned local body Ombudsman and
the Ombudsman recommends such action.
c. If, on any occasion, the State Government is in possession of records or
has adequate reasons to initiate action against the Urban Local Bodies or
its elected representatives, it should place the records before the local body
Ombudsman concerned for investigation.
, I

CAPACITY BUILDING FOR CONFLICT RESOLUTION
- Friction to Fusion
1. (Para 3.8) Left Extremism
a. Along-term (IO-year) and short-term (5-year) Programme ofA ction based
on the 'I4-Point Strategy' announced in Parliament may be formulated
by the Union Government in consultation with the concerned State
Governments to identify State specific action to be taken to implement
the 'Strategy'.
b. While agreeing with the spirit of the '14-Point Strategy', negotiations
with the extremist outfits should be an important mode of conflict
resolution.
c. There is a strong case for 'back to the basics' in the matter of administrative
monitoring and supervision. The system of periodic official inspections
and review of organisational performances needs to be revitalised. It must
be recognised that a major reason for such practices falling in disuse in
'disturbed areas' is the apprehension of senior functionaries about their
personal safety while on tour. It is advisable that the need to provide suitable
security to the senior administrative and technical officers while on tour,
is taken into account in working out requirements for security forces in
areas affected by serious violence.
d. There is need to enhance the capacity of the security forces to act effectively
and firmly, but in conformity with constitutional bounds; it is necessary
that standard operational procedures and protocols are laid down in specific
terms and detail.
e. Training and reorientation including sensitising the police and paramilitary
personnel to the root causes of the disturbances that they are seeking to
curb, are necessary.
f. Formation of trained special task forces on the pattern of the Greyhounds
in Andhra Pradesh should be an important element of the strategy to build

Capacity Building for Conflict Resolution - Friction to Fusion
capacity in the police machinery for tackling left extremism.
g. Establishing and strengthening local level police stations, adequately staffed
by local recruits, in the extremist affected regions should be an important
component of the policing strategy for tackling left extremism.
h. For effective implementation of the Scheduled Tribes and other
Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Rights) Act, 2006, multi
disciplinary Oversight Committees may be constituted to ensure that the
implementation of this ameliorative legislation does not adversely affect
the local ecosystems.
i. Special efforts are needed to monitor the implementation of constitutional
and statutory safeguards, development schemes and land reforms initiatives
for containing discontent among sections vulnerable to the propaganda of
violent left extremism.
j. To facilitate locally relevant development adequate flexibility may be
provided to implementing agencies in the affected areas as regards centrally
sponsored and other schemes, so as to enable them to introduce suitable
changes based on local requirements.
k. Performance of the States in amending their Panchayati Raj Acts and other
regulations to bring them in line with the provisions of the Panchayats
(Extension to the Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996 (PESA) and in implementing
these provisions may be monitored and incentivised by the Union Ministry
of Panchayati Raj.
l. The nexus between illegal mining/forest conU·actors and transporters
and extremists which provides the financial support for the extremist
movement needs to be broken. To achieve this, special anti-extortion and
anti-money laundering cell should be established by the State police/State
Government.
m. For implementing large infrastructure projects, particularly road networks,
that are strongly opposed by the extremists or are used to extort funds
from local contractors, the use of specialised Government agencies like
the Border Roads Organisation in place of contractors may be considered
as a temporary measure.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
2. (Para 4.9) Land Related Issues
a. The following steps may be taken to alleviate the distress in the agrarian
sector:
i. Provide renewed impetus to land reform measures like redistribution of
surplus land, vesting tide in tenants and carrying forward consolidation
ofl and holdings etc for maintaining and promoting the sustainability
of agriculture.
ii. In order to provide adequate and timely facilities to farmers, there
is need to augment the banking system in the rural areas and make
them more responsive to the farmers' needs.
iii. Redesign poverty alleviation programmes to make them more relevant
to the needs of small and marginal farmers.
iv. Step up public investment in order to expand non-farm and off
farm activities to provide alternative livelihood opportunities for
the poorer farmers within rural areas.
v. Introduce measures to encourage formation of 'Self Help Groups'
(SHGs) to improve access to credit and marketing and empower the
disadvantaged.
vi. Diversify risk coverage measures such as weather insurance schemes
and price support mechanisms.
b. A new legislation for land acquisition incorporating the principles laid
down in the revised national rehabilitation policy needs to be enacted. The
recendy announced national policy on rehabilitation of project affected
persons should be implemented forthwith for all ongoing projects as well
as those in the pipeline.
c. There is need to amend the present approach to SEZs on the following
lines:
i. In establishing SEZs, use of prime agricultural land should be
avoided.

Capacity Building for Conflict Resolution - Friction to Fusion
ii. The number of SEZs should be limited, with a larger minimum size
with locations preferably in backward areas so that they act as nuclei
for economic growth.
iii. SEZs promoted by farmers themselves should be encouraged.
iv. The livelihood of the displaced should be a major concern of the SEZ
policy.
v. The SEZ regulations should clearly allocate social responsibility
of rehabilitation to entrepreneurs seeking to establish SEZs. This
should include provision for water, sanitation, health facilities, and
vocational training centres.
vi. The proportion of land that is permitted to be used by the promoters
of SEZs for non-processing activities should be kept to a minimum
and this should be ensured at the tinle of approval of their plans. The
existing ratio between processing and non-processing activities needs
to be re-examined in order to maximize the proportion of land put
to productive use. Also strict adherence to environmental regulations
should be ensured.
vii. Comprehensive land use plans should be prepared and finalised
after wide public consultations. Industrial activities in SEZs should
be located only in areas earmarked for the purpose in the land use
plans.
viii. The extremely liberal tax holidays provided both to export units and
to developers require reconsideration.
3. (Para 5.5) Water Related Issues
a. The Union Government needs to be more proactive and decisive in cases
of inter-State river disputes and act with the proIilptness and sustained
attention that such disputes demand.
b. Since Article 262 of the Constitution provides that neither the Supreme
Court nor any other Court shall exercise jurisdiction in respect of inter
State river disputes, it is necessary that the spirit behind this provision is
fully appreciated.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
c. River Basin Organisations (RBOs) should be set up for each inter-State
river, as proposed by the Report of the National Commission for Integrated
Water Resources Development, 1999 by enacting a legislation to replace
the River Boards Act, 1956.
d. The Chairmen of all the River Basin Organisations, as and when formed,
should be made members of the National Water Resources Council.
e. The National Water Resources Council and RBOs should play a more
positive role. The Council and its secretariat should be more proactive,
suggest institutional and legislative reforms in detail, devise modalities
for resolving inter-State water conflicts, and advise on procedures,
administrative arrangements and regulation of use of resources by different
beneficiaries keeping in view their optimum development and ensuring
maximum benefits to the people.
f. In order to develop, conserve, utilise and manage water on the basis of a
framework that incorporates long term perspectives, a national water law
should be enacted as suggested in para 5.4.3 above.
4. (Para 6.11) Issues Related to Scheduled Castes
a. Government should adopt a multi-pronged administrative strategy to
ensure that the Constitutional, legal and administrative provisions made
to end discrimination against the Scheduled Castes are implemented in
letter and spirit.
b. To ensure speedy disposal of discrimination cases pending in subordinate
courts, an internal mechanism may be set up under the control of the High
Court Administrative Judge to review such cases.
c. There is need to place a positive duty on public authorities for promotion
of social and communal harmony and prevention of discrimination against
the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes .
. d. There is need for engaging independent agencies to carry out field surveys
to identify cases of social discrimination.
e. There is need to spread awareness about the laws and the measures to
punish discrimination and atrocities. It is necessary to launch well-targeted

Capacity Building for Conflict Resolution - Friction to Fusion
awareness campaigns in areas where the awareness levels are low. The
District Administration should organise independent surveys to identify
'vulnerable areas'.
f. The administration and the police should be sensitised towards the special
problems of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. They should also
playa more pro-active role in detection and investigation of crimes against
the weaker sections. Appropriate training programmes would help in the
sensitising process.
g. Enforcement agencies should be instructed in unambiguous terms that
enforcement of the rights of the weaker sections should not be downplayed
for fear of further disturbances or retribution.
h. The Administration should focus on the rehabilitation of the victims and
provide all required support to them including counselling.
i. As far as possible the deployment of police personnel in police stations
with significant proportion of SCs and STs should be in proportion to the
population of such communities. The same principle should be followed in
cases of localities having substantial proportion of linguistic and religious
minorities.
j. A statutory duty may be cast on all public authorities to promote equality
and actively check social discrimination.
k. It would be desirable to introduce a system of incentives wherein efforts
made by these officials in detecting and successfully prosecuting cases
of discrimination/atrocities against the Scheduled Castes are suitably
acknowledged.
1. There should be training programmes for the law enforcement agencies to
suitably sensitise them to the problems of the Scheduled Castes and the
need for strict enforcement of laws.
m. The local governments - municipalities and panchayats - should be actively
involved in various programmes concerned with effective enforcement of
various social legislations.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
n. The corporate sector and NGOs need to be involved in complementing
the efforts of government for the development of the Scheduled Castes.
Such voluntary action should not only be directed towards economic and
social empowerment of the SCs, but also towards enabling them to raise
their voice against atrocities, discrimination and exploitation.
5. (Para 7.10) Issues Related to Scheduled Tribes
a. While all States in the Fifth Schedule Area have enacted compliance
legislations vis-a.-vis PESA, their provisions have been diluted by giving
the power of the Gram Sabha to other bodies. Subject matter laws and
rules in respect of money lending, forest, mining and excise have not also
been amended. This needs to be done. In case of default, Government of
India would need to issue specific directions under Proviso 3 of Part A
of the Fifth Schedule, to establish a forum at the central level to look at
violations and apply correctives. The Commission would like to re-iterate
the importance of the Annual Reports of the Governors under the Fifth
Schedule of the Constitution.
b. Awareness campaigns should be organised in order to make the tribal
population aware of the provisions of PESA and the 73rd amendment to
the Constitution so as to demand accountability in cases in which the final
decisions are contrary to the decisions of the Gram Sabha or Panchayat.
c. There should be a complete overhaul and systematic re-organisation
of existing land records with free access to information about land
holdings.
d. There is need to harmonise the various legislations and government policies
being implemented in tribal areas with the provisions of PESA. The laws
that -t.:equire harmonisation are the Land Acquisition Act, 1894, Mines
and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957, the Indian Forest
Act, 1927, the Forest Conservation Act, 1980, and the Indian Registration
Act. National policies such as the National Water Policy, 2002, National
Minerals Policy, 2003, National Forest Policy, 1988, Wildlife Conservation
Strategy, 2002 and National Draft Environment Policy, 2004 would also
require harmonisation with PESA.

Capacity Building for Conflict Resolution - Friction to Fusion
e. Mining laws applicable to Scheduled Tribal Areas should be in conformity
with the principles of the Fifth and Sixth Schedules of the Constitution.
f. Government should select such police, revenue and forest officials who
have the training and zeal to work in tribal areas and understand as well
as empathise with the population they serve.
g. A national plan of action for comprehensive development which would
serve as a road map for the welfare of the tribals should be prepared and
implemented.
h. There should be convergence of regulatory and development programmes
in the tribal areas. For the purpose, a decadal development plan should be
prepared and implemented in a mission mode with appropriate mechanism
for resolution of conflicts and adjustments.
i. The authorities involved in determining the inclusion and exclusion oft ribes
in the list of Scheduled Tribes should adopt a mechanism of consultation
with the major States and those with tribal populations, on the basis of
which a comprehensive methodology with clearly defined parameters is
arrived at.
6. (Para 8.6) Issues Related to Other Backward Classes
a. Government may work out the modalities of a survey and take up a state
wise socio-economic survey of the "Other Backward Classes", which could
form the basis of policies and programmes to improve their status.
b. Government needs to formulate and implement a comprehensive scheme
for capacity building of OBCs that would bring them at par with the rest
of society.
7. (Para 9.6) Religious Conflicts
a. Community policing should be encouraged. The principles laid down by
the Commission in paragraph 5.15.5 of its Report on 'Public Order' should
be followed.
b. District Peace Committees/Integration Councils should be made effective
instruments of addressing issues likely to cause communal disharmony.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
The District Magistrate in consultation with the Superintendent of
Police should constitute these committees. In Police Commissionerates,
these committees should be constituted by the Police Commissioner in
consultation with the Municipal Commissioner. The committees should
be of permanent nature. These committees should identify local problems
with a potential to degenerate into communal conflicts and suggest means
to deal with them at the earliest. Further, Mohalla Committees should also
be organised on the same lines.
c. In conflict prone areas, the police should formulate programmes in which
the members of the target population get an opportunity of interacting
with the police as a confidence building mechanism.
d. A separate law to deal with communal violence is not required. The
existing provisions of the Indian Penal Code and the Criminal Procedure
Code need to be strengthened. This may be achieved by incorporating
provisions for:
i. Enhanced punishments for communal offences.
ii. Setting up of special courts for expeditious trial of cases related to
communal violence.
iii. Giving powers of remand to Executive Magistrates in cases of communal
offences.
iv. Prescription of norms of relief and rehabilitation.
Further, as recommended in para 6.1.7.9 of the Commission's Report on
'Public Order', this should be accompanied by the deletion of the provisions
contained in Section 196 of CrPC requiring prior sanction of the Union
or State Government or the District Magistrate for initiating prosecution
for offences under Sections 153A, 153B, 295A and sub-sections (1) (c), (2)
and (3) of Section 505 ofIPC.
e. For providing relief and rehabilitation to victims of communal violence,
the framework provided under the Disaster Management Act, 2005 could
be effectively used.

Capacity Building for Conflict Resolution - Friction to Fusion
8. (Para 10.3) Politics and Conflicts
a. Political parties should evolve a code of conduct on the forms of dissent
permissible in our democratic set up. This could be incorporated in a
law, which would apply to all political parties and their functionaries.
Enforcement of the law could be entrusted to the Election Commission.
The law should also stipulate punitive action against political parties and
their functionaries violating the prescribed forms of democratic dissent,
by providing for criminal cases to be filed against them and imposing fines
as deterrent.
b. There should be consensus that identity politics would be played within the
space provided by democracy and not allowed to develop into intractable
conflicts leading to violence. Political parties need to build capacity to
arrive at such a consensus.
9. (Para 11.6) Regional Disparities
a. A composite criteria for identifying backward areas (with the Block as a
unit) based on indicators of human development including poverty, literacy
and infant mortality rates, along with indices of social and economic
infrastructure, should be developed by t~e Planning Commission for the
12th Five Year Plan.
b. Union and State Governments should adopt a formula for Block-wise
devolution of funds targeted at more backward areas.
c. Governance needs to be particularly strengthened in more backward areas
within a State. The role of 'special purpose vehicles' such as backward area
development boards and authorities in reducing intra-State disparities
needs to be reviewed. It is advisable to strengthen local governments and
make them responsible and accountable.
d. A system of rewarding States (including developed States) achieving
significant reduction in intra-State disparities should be introduced.
e. Additional funds need to be provided to build core infrastructure at the
inter-district level in less developed States and backward regions in such
States. The quantum of assistance should be made proportionate to the
number of people living in such areas.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
f. The approach to all such funding should be outcome driven. The
strategy should be to define acceptable minimum norms of human and
infrastructure development that every block in the country should attain
and funding should be driven by the consideration to achieve the norms
so defined.
10. (Para 12.6.1.4) Capacity Building in Administration in the North East
a. Greater opportunities may be provided to officers serving in the region
to serve outside the North East to gain greater exposure to diverse work
situations. Local and technical officers from the State should also be given
opportunities to serve in larger States and to improve their professional
qualifications through training in the country and abroad.
b. Incentives available for officers working in the North East should be
increased.
c. Regional training institutions for various branches of administration,
including the technical services may be operated by the North Eastern
Council.
d. NEC may initiate discussions with the States to examine the legal
implications and feasibility of regional cadres for senior positions in
technical and specialised departments under the States.
e. NEC and the Ministry of Home Affairs may, in collaboration with the
States, draw up an agenda for administrative reforms for the region with its
implementation being monitored systematically. Satisfactory performance
in implementation of this charter may qualify the States to additional
funding including special economic packages.
11. (Para 12.6.2.4) Capacity Building in Police in the North East
a. The North Eastern Police Academy (NEPA) needs major upgradation
of infrastructure and staff to cater to a larger number of officers at the
induction level. NEPA may also be developed for imparting training to civil
police officers from other regions in dealing with insurgency. Financial and
other incentives are necessary for attracting and retaining instructors in the
Academy from the Central Police organisations and civil police particularly
those with proven track record in counter-insurgency operations.

Capacity Building for Conflict Resolution - Friction to Fusion
b. Concrete steps are needed to introduce a scheme of deploying police
personnel from the region to Central Police Organisations and to encourage
deputation of police officers from outside the region to the North Eastern
States.
12. (Para 12.6.3.1.7) Capacity Building in Local Governance Institutions in the North
East - Sixth Schedule Councils
a. To avoid complaints of less favourable treatment to 'Scheduled Areas' in
certain respects, suitable amendment may be made in the Sixth Schedule
of the Constitution to enable the Autonomous Councils to benefit from
the recommendations of State Finance Commissions and the State Election
Commissions provided respectively under Articles 2431 and 243K of the
Constitution of India.
b. The Union Government, Government of Meghalaya and the Autonomous
Councils in that State may review the existing pattern of relationship
between the Councils and the State Government to evolve a satisfactory
mechanism to resolve conflicts between the Councils and the State
Government.
c. Ministry of Home Affairs may, in consultation with the concerned State
Governments and the Autonomous Councils, identify powers under the
Sixth Schedule that Governors may exercise at their discretion without
having to act on the 'aid and advice' oft he Council ofM inisters as envisaged
in Article 163 (1) of the Constitution.
d. Paragraph 14 of the Sixth Schedule may be suitably amended to enable the
Union Government to appoint a common Commission for all autonomous
districts for assessing their state of administration and making other
recommendations envisaged in that paragraph. A periodicity may also be
provided for the Commission.
e. Government of Assam should review the existing arrangements of
determining budgetary allocations and release of funds to the 'original'
Autonomous Councils with a view, as far as practicable, to bringing them
at par with the arrangements for the Bodoland Territorial Council.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
13. (Para 12.6.3.2.4) Capacity Building in Local Governance Institutions - Village
Level Self-governance in the Tribal North East
a. Measures should be taken to ensure that all the Autonomous Councils
pass suitable legislation for establishing of village level bodies with well
defined powers and a transparent system of allocation of resources.
b. Stipulation may be made in the rules relating to release of grants to the
Autonomous Councils to the effect that passage of appropriate legislation
for elected village level bodies and its implementation, will entitle the
Councils to additional funding.
c. To enable the Autonomous Councils to discharge their responsibilities
satisfactorily, it is imperative that the requirement of funds by these bodies
is worked out normatively with reference to the minimum standards of
service to be provided and capacity to raise local resources. Such exercise
could be undertaken by the State Finance Commission.
d. Nagaland has made commendable efforts to usher in a paradigm of
decentralised village self-governance which combines the elective element
with traditional power centers. The Ministry of Rural Development
should formally recognise this arrangement for implementation ofv arious
development and poverty alleviation initiatives.
e. Government ofMeghalaya may take steps for extension of the experiment
of elected village committees in the Garo Hills for implementation
of the National Employment Guarantee Act throughout the State for
implementation of all rural development programmes.
f. It is imperative that in all States where village bodies administer justice
under customary laws by virtue of the Sixth Schedule or other laws, such
laws are duly codified.
14. (Para 12.6.3.4.3) Capacity Building in Local Governance Institutions in the North
East - Tribe Specific Councils in Assam and other Issues
a. Government ofA ssam may apportion functions between the tribe specific
Councils/village Councils and the Panchayati Raj Institutions in a manner
that schemes involving individual tribal beneficiaries may be assigned to
the 'Tribe Specific Councils' while area development schemes are left to
the latter.

Capacity Building for Conflict Resolution - Friction to Fusion
b. State Governments may initiate a system ofm eeting at least the establishment
costs of the Councils from sources outside the tribal sub plan and build in
these requirements in their projections to the next Finance Commission.
c. State Governments may take steps to identify innovative initiatives which
could be entrusted to the Tribe Specific Councils without affecting area
development concerns.
d. Suitable guidelines may be prepared for preparation of District and sub
District plans in the relevant areas through joint efforts of the Tribe Specific
Councils and the Panchayati Raj Institutions.
e. While continuous and vigorous measures are needed to bring about a
consensus between various sections of society in Manipur about revival
of the Hill Districts Councils, steps may be urgently taken to bring in
suitable legislation to introduce elected village level bodies in the hill areas
of that State.
15. (Para 12.6.4.3) Capacity Building in Regional Institutions in the North East -
NEC and DONER
a. The NEC Act, 1971 may be suitably amended to restore the original
'conflict resolution provision' requiring the Council to 'discuss issues of
mutual interest to two or more states in the region and to advise the Central
Government thereon'.
c. To enable the Council to assist effectively in the discharge of its
responsibilities for reviewing the measures taken by the member-States for
maintenance of security in the region, Ministry of Home Affairs should
keep the Council Secretariat regularly within its 'security coordination
loop'. The Council Secretariat would also need to be suitably strengthened
to effectively assist in security coordination.
d. The Planning Commission needs to lay down a framework for preparation
of integrated regional plans, with priorities and not as an assortment of
schemes by the NEC. The regional plan should focus on areas with a bearing
on intra-regional, inter-State priorities which have the potential of avoiding
conflicts and promoting regional integration.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
e. Planning Commission should ensure the association of the NEC in the
State plan formulation exercise by suitably amending their guidelines.
f. The responsibility of sanctioning funds from the 'Non Lapsable Central
Pool of Resources' (NLCPR) should be entrusted to the North Eastern
Council (NEC). NEC should work out mechanisms for scrutinising
proposals for funding from the 'pool' and their funding in coordination
with the Ministries concerned.
g. It is desirable that a 10-year perspective plan is prepared for the entire
region encompassing areas like development of human resources and
infrastructure. A governance reform agenda should also form part of this
plan. This comprehensive plan needs to be reviewed by the Prime Minister
regularly with the Chief Ministers for speedy follow-up.
h. The Ministry for Development of North Eastern Region (DONER) may
be abolished and the responsibility for the development of the region,
including the infrastructure sectors, and utilisation of the non-Iapsable
fund should be restored to the subject matter Ministries, with the MHA
acting as the nodal Ministry.
16. (Para 12.6.5.2) Capacity Building in Other Regional Institutions in the North
East
a. NEC may prepare a comprehensive scheme for making NEHU a centre
for advanced study in Sciences, Social Sciences and Humanities to
address diverse issues common to the region as a whole. NEC may also
actively coordinate arrangements with the State Governments to make
NEIGRIHMS a centre for tertiary health care particularly for the low
income groups in the region.
17. (Para 12.6.6.3) National Register of Indian Citizens
a. The MNIC project needs to be taken up on a priority basis. Since there
are several Union Government and State Government agencies which
issue similar identity cards, it would be necessary to achieve convergence
amongst all such systems so that the MNIC becomes the basic document
for identification of a person and lends itself to be used as a multi-purpose
individual card. Priority should be given to areas having international
borders, for implementation of this Project.

Capacity Building for Conflict Resolution - Friction to Fusion
18. (Para 12.6.7.2) Capacity Building in the North East - Miscellaneous Issues
a. The recommendations of the High Level Commission contained in its
Report - 'Transforming the North East' -and the report of the Task Force
on Development Initiatives prepared by the North Eastern Council should
be implemented to fill the gaps in infrastructure in the region.
b. A comprehensive framework needs to be evolved and put in place to promote
the region as a preferred investment destination.
c. A Transport Development Fund to finance construction of important road
corridors should be set up.
d. Comprehensive implementation of a 'look east' policy though relevant for
the country as a whole, is especially important for the long term growth
of the North East. The agenda for its implementation must be prepared
in active association with the State Governments. Clear apportionment
of responsibility for planning and implementation of the policy between
various Ministries of the Union Government for its implementation should
be expeditiously undertaken.
e. Rail connectivity should be improved in the region on a priority basis.
f. Much greater efforts are needed to establish bank branches and other credit
disbursement oudets through further relaxation and incentivisation in the
policies of the Reserve Bank and other financial institutions.
g. There is need for setting up of centres of excellence for professional and
higher education in the North East. In addition, a large scale expansion
of facilities for technical education, such as ITIs, should be carried out to
create a pool of skilled work force and generate entrepreneurial capacity
as well as employment.
h. There is a need to make an in-depth study of the customary judicial system
in order to achieve better understanding and dissemination of the prevailing
norms and practices.
i. It is necessary to evolve a credible system of maintenance of land records
for the North East.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
19. (Para 13.2.5) Executive and Conflict Management - Police and Executive
Magistracy
a. Police Reforms recommended by the Commission in its Fifth Report, "Public
Order" (Chapters 5 and 6) are likely to augment the institutional capacity of
the Police to playa more proactive and effective role in conflict resolution.
The Commission, therefore, reiterates these recommendations.
b. Police Manuals must be updated to contain suitable provisions extending
the scope of responsibilities of Police officials to include conflict resolution
in their charter of duties. Suitable amendments in training formats may
also be carried out to provide relevant inputs on the subject. Achievements
under this 'head' needs to be taken into account while evaluating overall
performance.
c. Executive Magistrates in their capacity as Revenue and other field level
officials have extensive public inter-face and enjoy considerable goodwill
particularly in rural areas. Their familiarity with the field situation and
general acceptability makes them eminently suitable to be involved as
interlocutors in mediating in local conflicts. State Governments need to
build on the modalities and the institutional framework in this regard.
20. (Para 13.3.4) Judicial Delays and Alternative Dispute Redressal
a. Allocation of resources for upgradation of infrastructure and personnel of
the subordinate judiciary needs to receive higher priority in federal fiscal
transfers.
b. Much greater attention needs to be paid to make the institution of
Lok Adalats serve their intended objective, and in particular to enlist
active cooperation of the members of the Bar to give this approach a chance
of success.
c. Ministry of Law may initiate a dialogue with the Bench and the Bar of the
higher judiciary to explore ways and means of bringing 'greater finality'
to the decisions of quasi-judicial authorities and bodies.
21. (Para 13.4.5) Civil Society and Conflict Resolution
a. While social capital formation needs encouragement to improve delivery
of services and build community self reliance, it is imperative that such

Capacity Building for Conflict Resoiution - Friction to Fusion
initiatives also attempt to involve communities in 'in-house' conflict
resolution.
b. General policy guidelines need to be formulated by the State Governments
for involving both the Panchayats and urban local bodies along with 'non
police' instrumentalities of the State, in conflict resolution.
c. Guidelines of Centrally sponsored and Central Sector Schemes may be
suitably modified to require that beneficiary capacity building may also
emphasise developing self-reliance in local conflict management.
22. (Para 14.3.1.1.10) Institutional Arrangements for Conflict Management - The
Inter-State Council
a. The conflict resolution role envisaged for the Inter-State Council under
Article 263 (a) of the Constitution should be effectively utilised to find
solutions to disputes among States or between all or some of the States
and the Union.
b. The Inter-State Council may not, however, exist as a permanent body.
As and when a specific need arises, a suitable Presidential order may be
issued constituting and convening the Council to consider a dispute or
coordination of policy or action on matters of interest to the Union and
concerned States. This body may cease to function once the purpose for
which it was constituted is completed.
c. The composition of an Inter-State Council may be flexible to suit the
exigencies of the matter referred to it under Article 263.
d. If necessary, more than one Inter-State Council could be in existence at the
same time with different terms of reference and composition as warranted
for each Council.
23. (Para 14.3.1.2.5) Institutional Arrangements for Conflict Management - The
National Commission for Scheduled Ca~tes and The National Commission for
Scheduled Tribes
a. The National Commissions for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes have
an important mandate to guide review and monitor the implementation
of safeguards provided for SC/STs in various fields, including in the
• I

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
matter of their service conditions. It is imperative that the focus of the
two Commissions remains on policy and larger issues of implementation
rather than on cases of an individual nature which can be looked into by
the administrative Ministries/appropriate forum with the Commissions
playing a critical oversight role.
b. The administrative Ministries connected with the two Commissions may
undertake an exercise, and in consultation with these bodies, work out
the details of how these bodies could be better enabled to discharge their
constitutional mandate.
24. (Para 14.3.2.1.4) Institutional Arrangements for Conflict Management - The
Zonal Councils
a. The system of Zonal Councils may be dispensed with. Important issues of
Inter-State coordination or disputes between States in the same region may,
wherever necessary, be entrusted to an Inter-State Council with appropriate
composition and terms of reference so that any given issue is considered
in depth.
25. (Para 14.3.3.1.8) Institutional Arrangements for Conflict Management - The
National Integration Council
(a) The mandate of the National Integration Council (NIC) requires
consideration of all factors impinging on national cohesion, and not only
communalism or communal violence. The agenda of the NIC needs to be
diversified.
(b) Substantive issues before the Council may be considered in detail in smaller,
subject-matter specific committees.
(c) The composition of the NIC may be rationalised to facilitate consideration
of a wider variety of issues. Broad guidelines may be framed by the Ministry
of Home Affairs for identifying interest groups and specialty streams that
need to be represented on the NI C.
(d) The Council may meet at least once a year, while the sub-committees could
meet as often as required to complete the assigned task in a time-bound
manner.
II'

Capacity Building for Conflict Resolution - Friction to Fusion
(e) Summary proceedings of the NIC may be laid before both Houses of
Parliament.
(f) The Indian Council of Social Science Research (ICSSR) and the Planning
Commission may take a lead in the matter of establishing a multi
disciplinary research and policy analysis platform to discuss issues
concerning national integration either in an existing institution or by
promoting a new institution or as a network.
26. (Para 14.3.3.3.2) Institutional Arrangements for Conflict Management - National
Development Council and Other Apex Level Bodies
a. Specific rules of procedure for the National Development Council and other
apex level bodies may be drawn up to ensure focussed deliberations.
27. (Para 14.4.2) Institutional Arrangements for Conflict Management - Other
Institutional Innovations
a. State Integration Councils may be constituted to take stock of State level
conflict situations having suitable linkages with the NIC. In important
matters, the report of State level bodies may also be brought for
consideration, advice and recommendations of the NIC. Guidelines for
deciding the membership to the National Integration Council may also
give suitable weightage to adequately representing the State Integration
Councils in the national body.
b. District level integration Councils (District Peace Committees) having
suitable linkages with the State Councils may also be considered particularly
for Districts with a history of violent, divisive conflicts. These should
comprise eminent individuals enjoying confidence of all sections of
society. These bodies may play mediatory and advisory roles in conflict
situations.

COMBATTING TERRORISM
- Protecting by Righteouness
1. (Para 4.1.6.9) Need for a Comprehensive Anti Terrorist Legislation
a. A comprehensive and effective legal framework to deal with all aspects of
terrorism needs to be enacted. The law should have adequate safeguards
to prevent its misuse. The legal provisions to deal with terrorism could be
incorporated in a separate chapter in the National Security Act, 1980.
2. (Para 4.2.9) Definition of Terrorism
a. There is need to define more clearly those criminal acts which can be
construed as being terrorist in nature. The salient features of this definition
should inter alia include the following:
i. use of firearms, explosives or any other lethal substance to cause
or likely to cause damage to life and property and essential
infrastructure including installations/e stablishments having military
significance.
ii. assassination of (including attempt thereof) public functionaries.
The intent should be to threaten the integrity, security and sovereignty
of India or overawe public functionaries or to terrorise people or
sections of people.
iii. Detention of any person or threat to kill or injure any person to
force the government to act or abstain from acting in a particular
manner.
iv. Providing/facilitating material support, including finances, for the
aforesaid activities.
v. Commission of certain acts or possession of certain arms etc. by
members or supporters of terrorist organizations which cause or

Combatting Terrorism - Protecting by Righteouness
are likely to cause loss of life, injury to a person or damage to any
property.
3. (Para 4.3.8) Bail Provisions
a. Regarding grant of bail, the law should provide that:
i. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, no person accused
of an offence punishable under this Act shall, if in custody, be
released on bailor on his own bond unless the Court gives the Public
Prosecutor an opportunity of being heard;
ii. Where the Public Prosecutor opposes the bail application of accused
to release on bail, no person accused of an offence punishable under
this Act or any rule made thereunder shall be released on bail until
the Court is satisfied that there are grounds for believing that the
accused is not guilty of committing such offence.
Provided that after the expiry of a period of one year from the date of
detention of the accused for an offence under this Act, the provisions
of sub-section (i) of this section shall apply.
iii. A Review Committee should review the case of all detenus periodically
and advise the prosecution about the release of the accused on bail
and the prosecution shall be bound by such advice.
4. (Para 4.4.5) Period of Detention (Remand) during Investigation
a. For terrorist and other related offences, it should be provided that Section
167 of the CrPC shall apply subject to the modification that in sub-section
(2), the references to "fifteen days", "ninety days" and "sixty days", wherever
they occur, shall be construed as references to "thirty days", "ninety days"
and "ninety days" respectively.
5. (Para 4.5.10) Confession before a Police Officer
a. Confession before the police should be made admissible as recommended in
the Report on Public Order. But this should be done only if comprehensive
police reforms as suggested by the Commission are carried out. Till such
time, confessions should continue to be made before judicial magistrates
under Section 164 CrPC.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
6. (Para 4.6.5) Presumptions under the Law
a. The following legal provisions should be included regarding
presumptions:
If it is proved -
i. that the arms or explosives or any other dangerous substance were
recovered from the possession oft he accused and there is reason to believe
that such arms or explosives or other substances of similar nature, were
used in the commission of such offence; or that by the evidence of an
expert the fingerprints of the accused, or any other definitive evidence
were found at the site of the offence or on anything including arms and
vehicles used in connection with the commission ofs uch offence the Court
shall draw adverse inference against the accused.
ii. If it is proved that the accused rendered any financial assistance to a
person accused of, or reasonably suspected of, an offence of terrorism,
the Court shall draw adverse inference against the accused.
7. (Para 4.7.10) Review Committee
a. A statutory Review Committee should be constituted to examine each case
registered, within 30 days of its registration. The Review Committee should
satisfy itself that a prima facie case has been made out by the investigation
agency. This Committee should review each case every quarter.
8. (Para 4.9.5) Special Courts
a. Provisions for constitution of Special Fast Track Courts exclusively for trial
of terrorism related cases may be incorporated in the law on terrorism.
Other specific provisions related to such Special Courts may also be
incorporated. Such Courts may be set up as and when required.
9. (Para 4.10.3) Possession of Arms etc.
a. Provision for penalizing unauthorized possession of certain specified arms
and ammunition in notified areas and unauthorized explosive substances,
weapons of mass destruction and biological or chemical substances of
warfare in notified as well as non-notified areas, may be incorporated in
the law on terrorism.

Combatting Terrorism - Protecting by Righteouness
10. (Para 4.11.4) A Federal Agency to Investigate Terrorist Offences
a. The Commission would like to reiterate the recommendations made in its
Report on 'Public Order' (paragraph 8.3.14) on the creation of a specialized
Division in the CBI to investigate terror offences.
b. It should be ensured that this Division of the CBI is staffed by personnel of
proven integrity and who are professionally competent and have developed
the required expertise in investigation of terrorism related offences. The
autonomy and independence of this agency may be ensured through
a laid down procedure of appointment and assured fixed tenure for its
personnel.
11. (Para 5.2.4) Measures against Financing ofT errorism - Anti-money Laundering
Measures
a. The Prevention ofM oney-laundering Act (PML A) may be suitably amended
at an early date to expand the list of predicate offences to widen its scope
and outreach.
b. The stage at which search and seizure action may be taken under the
PMLA may be advanced in cases involving wider ramifications. Adequate
safeguards may also be put in place in such cases.
c. It may be examined whether institutional coordination mechanisms
between the Directorate of Enforcement and other intelligence collecting
and investigating agencies, could be strengthened and some provisions of
the PMLA delegated to them by the Enforcement Directorate.
d. The financial transaction reporting regime under the Financial Intelligence
Unit (FIU-IND) may be extended to cover high risk sectors such as real
estate. There is also need to strengthen the capacity of FlU- IND to enable
it to meet future challenges.
e. It would be useful to utilize the platform provided by the Regional Economic
Intelligence Councils (REICs) for increased coordination among various
investigation agencies in cases which are suspected to be linked with money
laundering. Further, owing to the complexity of cases involved, the FIU
IND, apart from disseminating agency specific information, should furnish
overall region-centric information to the Central Economic Intelligence

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Bureau (CEIB) for disseminating it to the respective REICs with a view
to expanding the information regime.
12. (Para 5.3.4) Measures against Financing of Terrorism - Measures to block the
How of Funds for Financing Terrorist Activities
a. The new legal framework on terrorism may incorporate provisions
regarding freezing of assets, funds, bank accounts, deposits, cash etc. when
there is reasonable suspicion of their intended use in terrorist activities.
Such actions may be undertaken by the investigating officer with the prior
approval of a designated authority, subject to adequate safeguards. These
provisions may be incorporated in a separate chapter in the National
Security Act, 1980 as recommended in paragraph 4.1.6.9.
b. A specialized cell may be created in the proposed National Counter
terrorism Centre drawing upon expertise from the Union Ministries of
Finance and Home Affairs and the Cabinet Secretariat for taking concerted
action on the financial leads provided from information gathered by
various sources. Further, different investigation agencies dealing with
financial transactions may setup anti-terrorist finance cells within their
organizations to augment the efforts of intelligence agencies involved in
counter-terrorism activities.
c. For speedy investigation into the financial aspects ofs pecific cases/group of
cases related to terrorist activities, dedicated teams may be formed within
the agencies charged with the responsibility of investigating into offences
related to terrorism. This may be accomplished by inducting officers
having specialization in different aspects of financial investigation for
short periods, say three to six months. A protocol for achieving this may be
arrived at between the concerned Union and State Ministries/Departments
to facilitate such capacity building and strengthening the effectiveness of
the counter-terrorist measures.
13. Institutional and Administrative Measures (This Chapter has been classified as
'Confidential' - the summary of recommendations pertaining to this chapter
are at paragraphs 6.3.6, 6.4.4, 6.5.3 and 6.6.4).
14. (Para 7.2.6) Role of Citizens, Civil Society and Media in Combatting Terrorism
- Education

Combatting Terrorism - Protecting by Righteouness
a. NCERT has proposed a scheme to encourage and support institutions,
voluntary agencies and NGOs etc. engaged. with school education for
promotion of Education for Peace within the country. These initiatives
need to be encouraged with necessary funds and other material support.
b. The feasibility of extending the scheme to religious schools also needs to
be examined.
15. (Para 7.4.7) Role of Citizens, Civil Society and Media in Combatting Terrorism
-Media
a. The potential of media in spreading education and awareness needs to be
tapped to build the capacity of citizens in dealing with any public disorder,
particularly terrorist violence.
b. Media should be encouraged to evolve a self regulating code of conduct
to ensure that publicity arising out of terrorist attacks does not help the
terrorist in their anti-national designs.

SOCIAL CAPITAL
- A Shared Destiny
1. (Para 3.1.2.6) New Legal Framework for Charities in India
a) The Union Government should draft a comprehensive model legislation
covering both Trusts and Societies in lieu of the existing laws on Societies,
Trusts, Endowments and Charitable Institutions etc.
b) In place of the present charity administration consisting of a Charity
Commissioner I Inspector General of Registrations as existing in the
States, the proposed law should provide for a new governance structure
in the form of a three member Charities Commission in each State with
necessary support staff for incorporation, regulation and development of
Charitable Organisations. The Chairman of the Commission should be a
law officer drawn from the cadre of District Judges. Out of the other two
members, one should be drawn from the voluntary sector and the other
would be an officer of the State Government. In addition, the State should
also have a Charities Tribunal which would exercise appellate powers over
the orders of the Charities Commission.
c) The proposed model legislation should indicate a cut off limit with regard
to the annual revenue of a Charity. Organisations having an annual income
below this threshold will have lighter compliance requirements with respect
to submission of returns I reports I permission etc. However, ifi rregularities
are detected in their functioning, the organisations will be liable for legal
and penal action. To start with, the cut offlimit could be set at Rs.I0 lakhs
which could be reviewed for upward revision once in five years.
d) The government should set up an Inclusive Committee which will
comprehensively examine the issue of defining 'Charity' and 'Charitable
Purpose' and suggest measures to "soften" charities-government
relationship, particularly in tax matters.
•

Social Capital-A Shared Destiny
e) The model legislation should take into consideration the views and
suggestions made above with regard to the following issues of charity
administration:
i. Interface with the State Government
ii. Alteration in the memorandum
iii. Approval on change report
iv. Alienation of immovable property
v. Contribution by Public Trusts to the State Government
2. (Para 3.2.6.2.5) Corporate Social Responsibility
a) When a community benefit project is taken up by a corporate entity, there
should be some mutual consultation between the company and the local
government so that there is no unnecessary overlap with other similar
development programmes in the area.
b) Government should act as a facilitator and create an environment which
encourages business and industry to take up projects and activities which
are likely to have an impact on the quality of life of the local community.
3. (Para 3.2.7.2.8) Accreditation ofV oluntary Organisations
a) There should be a system of accreditation I certification of voluntary
organisations which seek funding from government agencies.
b) Government should take initiative to enact a law to set up an independent
Body - National Accreditation Council - to take up this work. In the
beginning, Government may need to provide a one time corpus of funds
to this organisation.
c) The above law should provide details with regard to the constitution of
the Council, its functions, its powers to levy appropriate fees from the
applicants, and other related matters.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
4. (Para 3.3.7) Charitable Organisations and Tax Laws
a) Under Section 12AA and Section BOG, the registration or approval should
be granted or an order rejecting the application should be passed within
a period of ninety days from the date of filing of the application instead
of the present one hundred and eighty days.
b) In view of the fact that infrastructure projects are a critical component of
charitable institutions, the period for accumulation of surplus which is
currendy five years needs to be further enhanced.
c) The present National Committee may be replaced by four Regional
Committees to recommend "deduction on expenditure" to the Union
Government under Section 35AC of the Income Tax Act.
5. (Para 3.4.4) Regulation of Foreign Contribution
a) The Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Bill, 2006 needs to be amended
to include inter-alia the following suggestions:
i. There should be a fine balance between the purpose of the legislation
on one side and smooth functioning of the voluntary sector on
the other. The objectives of such a regulatory legislation should
be properly enunciated to avoid subjective interpretation
of law and its possible misuse.
ii. There should be a time limit for procedures falling under Section
11 (seeking registration or prior permission for receiving foreign
contribution) .
iii. Transparent rules/g uideliens should be prescribed for inter-agency
consultation particularly in respect of (a) the minimum amount of
donation which would require inter-agency consultation, (b) the
level of the Authority which would authorise it, and (c) setting up
time limits for such procedures.
iv. To facilitate (a) speedy disposal of registration / prior permission
petitions received from organisations, (b) effective monitoring of
their activities, and (c) proper scrutiny of returns filed by them,
some of the functions under the Foreign Contribution Regulation

Social Capital - A Shared Destiny
Act should be decentralised and delegated to State Governments!
District Administration.
v. Other concerns as stated in paragraph 3.4.1.5.3 also need to be
considered.
b) Organisations receiving an annual foreign contribution equivalent to less
than Rs.10.00 lakh in a year (the figure to be reviewed from time to time)
should be exempted from registration and other reporting requirements of
the law. They should be asked, instead, to file an annual return oft he foreign
contribution received by them and its utilisation at the end oft he year. The law
may provide that they may be liable to be investigated, ift here is a reasonable
suspicion of suppression! misrepresentation of facts, and penal provisions
of the law will be used against them in case violation is established.
6. (Para 4.6.10) Issues ofSelf-Heip Group Movement
a) The role of the Government in the growth and development of the SHG
movement should be that of a facilitator and promoter. The objective should
be to create a supportive environment for this movement.
b) Since a large number of rural households in the North-Eastern States and
Central-Eastern parts of the country (Bihar, Jharkhand, Uttar Pradesh,
Uttarakhand, Orissa, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and Rajasthan) do
not have adequate access to formal sources of credit, a major thrust on the
expansion of the SHG movement in these areas should be facilitated. The
presence of NABARD should be much more pronounced in these places.
c) The SHG movement needs to be extended to urban and peri-urban areas.
State Governments, NABARD and commercial Banks should join together
to prepare a directory of activities and financial products relevant to
such areas.
d) Currently, the commercial Banks, on the basis of a project's financial
viability can disburse microc redit in urban and semi-urban areas on their
own but such micro-credit disbursements are not entitled to refinance from
NABARD. If necessary, the NABARD Act, 1981 may be amended suitably
to bring urban! semi-urban areas under its refinance mandate.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
e) The SHG - Bank Linkage model with a mentor SHPI in tow deserves to be
encouraged as the preferred mode for financial intermediation throughout
the country.
f) Commercial Banks and NABARD in collaboration with the State
Government need to continuously innovate and design new financial
products for these groups.
g) There should be a planned effort to establish RRB networks in the
87 districts of the country which currently do not have RRB presence.
h) Special steps should be taken for training I capacity building of government
functionaries so that they develop a positive attitude and treat the poor
and marginalized as viable and responsible custolners and as possible
entrepreneurs.
i) Rural credit is often viewed as a potential Non Performing Asset. There is
need to educate government employees and Bank personnel in this regard.
Technology may be leveraged to reduce the cost of reaching out to the
poorest of the poor.
j) There is need to review the scale of the promotional grant given to SHPIs
by NABARD (currently Rs.1500/- per SHG formed and activated).
k) In order to scale up the operations of the Rashtriya Mahila Kosh, its
corpus should be enhanced substantially. RMK's geographical reach should
be expanded to help quick processing of loan applications and effective
monitoring of the sanctioned projects in far off areas. The Kosh may open
adequately staffed regional offices at selected places in the country and give
greater attention to the credit deficient States.
I) The Micro Financial Sector (Development and Regulation) Bill, 2007 needs
to be amended to include the following suggestions:-
i. The scope of Micro-finance Services should be substantially widened
to cover credit I savings, insurance, pension services, money transfer,

Social' Capital-A Shared Destiny
issue / discount of warehouse receipts and future / option contracts
for agricultural commodities and forest produce.
ii. 'Nidhis' registered under Section 620A of the Companies Act, and
Producer Companies should be brought under the new legislation.
iii. The activities of Section 25 Companies to the extent they concern
micro-financial services as described under the proposed Bill should
also be brought under the purview of this legislation. However, for
their management and other functions, they will continue to be
governed by the provisions of the Companies Act.
iv. The issue of interest rate charged by the MFls should be left to the
Regulatory Authority which is being created under the proposed
Bill.
v. It should be ensured that ifMFls are allowed to handle thrift / savings
and money transfer services, they would do so only as business
correspondents of commercial Banks. Other concerns as stated in
Para 4.6.9.9.2 also need to be considered.
m) Micro-finance institutions covered under the proposed law should be kept
out of the purview of the State laws on money-lending.
7. (Para 5.2.13) Separating Professional Education from Self-Regulatory
Authorities
a) Professional education should be taken away from the domain oft he existing
Regulatory Bodies and handed over to specially created agencies - one for
each of the streams of higher/professional education. These Bodies may
be called National Standards and Quality Council for Medicine, National
Standards and Quality Council for Management etc. After this bifurcation,
the work oft he existing Regulatory Bodies' would remain confined to issues
concerning registration, skill upgradation and management of professional
standards and ethics. On creation of these separate Councils, the AICTE
will stand abolished.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
b) Such Councils should be created by law and their role should be to lay
down norms, standards and parameters on issues concerning growth
and development of their stream viz. (a) setting up new institutions, (b)
designing/ updating curriculum, (c) faculty improvement, (d) carrying out
research / innovation, and (e) other key issues concerning the stream.
c) The proposed law should take into consideration the following guiding
principles while constituting these Councils:
i. Such Councils should have full autonomy.
ii. The highest policy and decision making Body of these Councils
should have a majority of independent members, and preferably no
more than 2 or 3 drawn from government, who could be there in an
ex-officio capacity.
iii. These Councils should have a strong and effective grievance redressal
mechanism.
iv. The Councils should be accountable to Parliament and their
Report should be placed before the House annually. In addition,
there should be strong norms for suo-motu disclosures under
the RTIAct.
v. Each of these Councils should have a body of experts to advise it
on accreditation / certification of institutions falling under their
jurisdiction.
vi. . Some of the members of such Councils can be elected from office
bearers of specialty Associations (e.g. Indian Medical Association),
as these members are elected by the practicing professionals in their
individual speciality.
d) Within such norms, standards and parameters, the Universities/
Autonomous Institutions should be given full autonomy for setting up
and running institutions under their jurisdiction.
e) The recommendations of the National Knowledge Commission regarding
reforms in the structure, governance and functioning of Universities should
be examined and implemented on priority. The process of appointment

Social Capital-A Shared Destiny
of Vice Chancellors should be free from direct or indirect interference of
the government. Vice Chancellors should be given a fixed tenure and they
should have adequate authority and Hexibility to govern the Universities
with the advice and consent of the Executive Council.
f) There should be stronger ties between educational institutions in the public
and private sectors through mechanisms such as exchange of faculty.
8. (Para 5.3.5) Continuing Professional Education
a) Every Professional Regulatory Body in coordination with the respective
National Quality and Standards Council and Academic Institutions should
conduct Continuing Professional Education programmes periodically for
updation and skill enhancement of its members.
9. (Para 5.4.3) Ethical Education and Training
a) After separation of professional education, the agenda of the Professional
Regulatory Authorities should be to focus on (i) procedure for registration
of new members / renewal of registration; and (ii) matters concerning
professional ethics, standards and behavior. The Regulatory Authorities
should also pay greater attention to conducting workshops, seminars and
training programmes on such issues.
10. (Para 5.5.4) Enrolment in the Profession
a) Within the parameters of the Act, the respective Regulatory Authority
should be empowered to prescribe guidelines for enrolment of new
members.
11. (Para 5.6.3) Renewal / Revalidation of Registration
a) There should be a provision in the relevant laws that a professional
registration/license will need revalidation after a prescribed number of
years. It could be done after successful completion of a course prescribed
by the respective Professional Regulatory Authority.
12. (Para 5.7.6) Disciplinary Mechanism
a) There should be provision in the relevant laws that in order to bring
objectivity in their working, the Disciplinary Committees of the Regulatory
. I

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
Authorities at both the State as well as the national level should consist of
professional and non-professional members. They could be inducted in
the Committee in the ratio of 60:40 respectively.
b) The law should provide that such Bodies should be required to complete
the entire disciplinary proceeding within a prescribed time span
(say 90 days).
c) The law should also have a provision that anybody aggrieved with the
findings of the State Panel could go in appeal to the National (Apex) Body
which too will have to dispose of the matter within the prescribed time
limit (say 90 days).
13. (Para 5.8.10) Constitution and Composition of the Self-Regulatory Authorities
a) The structure and composition of the General Council and the Executive
Committee of Professional Regulatory Authorities should be rationalised.
As far as practicable, it should be uniform for all of them.
b) Every Authority should have a fairly large and representative General
Council (the ideal number could be around 50; such a Body encourages
a wider perspective and diversity of opinions).
c) The Executive Committee should be a small Body consisting of 10 to
15 members (a compact forum supports administrative efficiency and
accountability).
d) There should be an explicit provision that a person cannot be elected to
the post of President / Vice-President or General Secretary for more than
one term. However, a person could be elected as a member of a Body for
a maximum of two terms.
14. (Para 5.8.12.4) Clients / Users - as Lay Members in Regulatory Authorities
a) The composition oft he General Council as well as the Executive Committee
should be such that 400 of the strength consists of lay members.
/0
b) The nomination of lay members should be done by the Ministry /
Department concerned in consultation with the appropriate Regulatory
Authority.
I •

Social Capital-A Shared Destiny
15. (Para 5.9.4) Accountability and Parliamentary Oversight·
a) The laws governing the Self-Regulatory Authories should have a provision
under which the Regulatory Authority should be required to present an
Annual Report to the Parliament for scrutiny.
16. (Para 6.4.10) Cooperatives; Constitutional Context
a) An Article should be added to Part-IV of the Constitution in the form of
43B where the State should be made responsible for making such laws
that will ensure autonomous, democratic, member driven and professional
cooperative institutions. In that case, a large scale Constitutional
amendment on the pattern of Parts-IX and IX-A which was introduced
by the 73rd and 74th Amendments, will not be necessary. The proposed
Article 43B may read as follows:
Article 43B: Empowerment of Co-operatives: "1he State shall endeavour
to secure by suitable legislation or economic organisation or any other way
autonomous, democratic, member driven and professional cooperative
institutions in different areas ofe conomic activity particularly those relating
. l "
to agrtcu ture.
b) The Commission endorses the amendments suggested by the National
Advisory Council and feels that this coupled with the amendment
suggested in the Directive Principles would be a step in the right direction
to make the cooperative institutions voluntary, democratic, professional,
member-driven and member-centric enterprises. Accordingly, the following
amendments may be made in the Constitution:
i. Under Article 19, 19(1) (h) may be added as follows:
"(h) to form and run cooperatives based on principles of voluntary
and open membership, democratic member control, member
economic participation, and autonomousf onctioningfree from State
control. "
H. Correspondingly, Article 19(4) should be amended as follows:
"(4) Nothing in sub-clauses (c) and (h) oft he said clause shall affect
the operation ofa ny existing law in so far as it imposes, or prevents
the State from making any law imposing, in the interests of [the

Reports ofthe Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
sovereignty and integrity of India or} public order or morality,
reasonable restrictions on the exercise oft he right conferred by the
said sub-clause".
17. (Para 6.5.6) Legislative Framework
a) All States (other than Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh,
Chhatisgarh, Orissa, Uttarakhand, Karnataka and Jammu and Kashmir)
should immediately take steps to enact their own Mutually Aided /
Self-Reliant Cooperative Societies Act on the pattern of the Model Law
suggested by the Task Force on Revival of Cooperative Credit Institutions.
The States where such Acts are already in existence should also examine the
Model Law suggested by the Task Force and amendments in the existing
legislations may be made, if so required.
b) For the next few years, there is need to have parallel laws to deal separately
with (i) the Mutually Aided / Self-Reliant cooperative societies formed
under the recent enactments (post 1995), and (ii) societies formed under
the old laws in which the government still has financial stakes. The societies
referred at (ii) above should gradually be encouraged to clear off their
liabilities and convert into Mutually Aided Societies.
18. (Para 6.6.8) Producer Companies
a) A new law regarding Producer Companies should be enacted on the basis
of the following broad principles:
i. Producer Companies should be given a liberal charter of functions
to take up any primary activity as per their technical and financial
capability;
ii. The law should provide for flexibility in investment of funds,
surpluses / reserves; .
iii. Depending on their functional requirement and financial strength,
a Producer Company should have full flexibility in creating /
abolishing executive and managerial posts;
iv. The compliance requirements with regard to the Company's audit
and accounts should be in tune with the size of its operations; and
v. The law should have provision for proxy voting in order to facilitate
smooth conduct of elections and general meetings.

Social Capital-A Shared Destiny
b) Co-operatives should be encouraged to incorporate themselves as Producer
Companies under the existing provisions of Part IXA of the Companies Act,
1956 and subsequently under the new law, as and when enacted, as this
would be a more viable option in the present environment. The existing
inter-State cooperative societies may also explore the possibility of getting
themselves converted into Producer Companies.
19. (Para 6.7.15) Cooperative Credit and Banking Institutions
a) The process of implementation of the revival package for Short-Term
Rural Cooperative Credit Structure (STCCS) formulated on the basis of
the Vaidyanathan Committee Report should be completed immediately.
It consists of the following major steps:
i. States which have so far not signed the M 0 U for this purpose should
be asked to do so without further loss of time.
ii. The Banking Regulation Act, NABARD Act and the State Cooperative
Societies Acts need to be suitably amended in order to improve the
management/g overnance of cooperative credit institutions.
iii. A model Cooperative Law needs to be enacted by the States. States
which do not wish to pass the Model Act, should introduce a separate
chapter on Agricultural and Rural Credit Societies containing the
salient provisions of the Model Law in their existing Cooperative
legislation.
b) Similar steps should be taken in a time-bound manner in respect of the
recommendations of the same Committee on Long-Term Cooperative
Credit Structure (LTCCS).
20. (Para 7.7) Integrated Social Policy
a) Government should craft an integrated social policy whkh will ensure
priority State action on the key issues relating to social justiee and
empowerment.
b) Government should provide a significant portion of its plan allocation for
implementation of this integrated social policy.

REFURBISHING OF PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION
- Scaling New Heights
1. (Para 5.3.6) Stage of Entry into the Civil Services
a. Government of India should establish National Institutes of Public
Administration to run Bachelor's Degree courses in public administration/
governance/management. In the long run it is expected that these specialized
centres of excellence (National Institutes of Public Administration) would
evolve as major sources of civil services aspirants.
b. Selected Central and other Universities should also be assisted to offer such
graduate level programmes in public administration/governance/public
management which will produce graduates to further expand the pool of
eligible applicants to the civil services.
c. The courses offered in these universities should include core subjects such
as the Constitution of India, Indian legal system, administrative law, Indian
economy, Indian polity, Indian history and culture apart from optional
subjects.
d. Graduates of the above mentioned special courses from the National
Institutes of Public Administration and selected universities would be
eligible for appearing in the Civil Services Examinations. Further, graduates
in other disciplines would also be eligible to appear in the Civil Services
Examination provided they complete ~ 'Bridge Course' in the core subjects
mentioned above. The Bridge course should be run by the same selected
national institutes/universities, which conduct the graduate level courses
stated in (c ) above.
e. Liberal need-based scholarships should be provided to students admitted
to the Institutes/Universities.
f. An 'Expert Committee' should be appointed immediately by the
Government in consultation with UPSC to develop the curricula and
determine the admission policy to these selected institutes/u niversities.

Refurbishing of Personnel Administration - Scaling New Heights
This Committee should inter alia have the following terms of reference:
i. Lay down norms for identification universities and institutes where
the said courses would be conducted.
ii. Design the content of the curricula for the said courses in public
administration.
iii. Prescribe the modalities for admission to these courses.
iv. Prescribe the modalities and design of the bridge courses.
The Commission strongly recommends that the Expert Committee be
appointed straightway so that the new courses could be started in some
of these institutions/universities from the coming academic year. The
Commission also feels that the bridge courses and their effectiveness should
be reviewed based on the experience of five years.
g. Since this is a major reform relating to an important area of governance and
will need coordinated guidance, especially in the initial years, a high-level
oversight/c oordination committee with the Prime Minister as Chairman
may be constituted to meet once in three months and give guidance to the
implementing agencies and concerned institutions.
h. The reforms to the scheme of the examination system as recommended in
paragraph 5.5 may be taken up immediately. Examination and Recruitment
reforms following the introduction of public administration/governance
management as a full-Hedged degree course in National Institutes of
Public Administration and selected universities would take some time to
be operationalised. Till then, the existing system, where students from all
disciplines can appear for the competitive examinations, may continue.
i. Students who have acquired a graduation degree in the above-mentioned
course would have option to join any other career of their choice either in
the public or private sector.
2. (Para 5.4.17) Age of Entry and Number of Attempts
a. The permissible age for appearing in the Civil Services Examination should
be 21 to 25 years for general candidates, 21 to 28 years for candidates from

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
OBC and 21 to 29 years for candidates from SC/ST as also for those who
are physically challenged.
b. The number of permissible attempts in the Civil Services Examination
should be 3, 5, 6 and 6 respectively for general candidates, candidates
from OBC, candidates from SC/ST and physically challenged candidates
respectively.
c. The present cut-off date for determining the eligibility in terms of age
(i.e. 1st of August in the year of the examination) may continue.
3. (Para 5.5.5.3) Structure of the Civil Services Examination
a. Structure of Examination: Either of the following two models may be
adopted for compressing the examination cycle.
i. The Preliminary and Main Examinations for the Civil Services
Examination would be conducted together on two to three consecutive
days. Evaluation of papers for the Main Examination should be done
in case of only those candidates who have secured a threshold level of
marks in the Preliminary Examination. The personality test would
follow thereafter.
OR
ii. Based on the results.o f the Preliminary Examination, candidates
eligible for taking the main examination and the personality test
would be short listed in accordance with their rankings. Only these
short-listed candidates would be eligible for ~ppearing in the M~n
Examination, which would be conducted within two'months of the
Preliminary Examination. The short list would be limited to about
two to three times of the number ofv acancies available. Thus it would
be possible to start the Personality Test and the Main Examination
almost simultaneously.
b. Content:
i. The Preliminary Examination should consist of an objective type
test having one or two papers on general studies including the
Constitution of India, the Indian legal system, Indian economy,
polity, history and culture. There should be no optional subjects.

Refurbishing of Personnel Administration - Scaling New Heights
ii. The Main Examination should consist of two papers only in the
compulsory subjects. These compulsory subjects may include
Constitution of India, Indian legal system, Indian economy, polity,
history and culture etc. The question papers should be of the
conventional descriptive type. Besides, there should be a separate
essay paper as a part of the Main Examination.
c. Steps may be taken by DOPT in consultation with the UPSC to finalise
the syllabi of compulsory subjects for the both the preliminary and main
examination, for the recruitment cycle 2010. This could later on be
dovetailed with the recommendation of the "Expert Committee" suggested
in Paragraph 5.3.6.
4. (Para 5.7.5) Other Modes of Induction into the Civil Services
a. The induction of officers of the State Civil Services into the lAS should be
done by the UPSC on the basis of a common examination.
b. UPSC should conduct such an examination annually for officers from
the State Civil Services who have completed 8 to 10 years of service in
Grade 'N. posts. The eligibility criteria should also include norms such as
an upper age limit of 40 years etc. On the basis of this examination, the
UPSC should provide the State Governments with an eligibility list. The
State Governments should fill up their quota for promotion to the lAS
on the basis of this eligibility list. A maximum of two attempts should be
allowed to an eligible candidate for taking this examination. To ensure
that the existing officers in the State Civil Services are not denied adequate
opportunities, the examination in the next two years may be conducted
for all such eligible officers and the upper age limit of 40 years may be
introduced, thereafter.
c. The mechanism mentioned above should also be applied in case ofi nduction
into other All India Services at the State level.
d. Induction by way of promotion into Group 'N. Central Services should,
in addition to consideration of ACRs, also be done through conduct of
examination on the basis of the criteria as mentioned above. The nature
of the examination, ratio of posts to be filled by promotion etc. should be
decided by the concerned departments in consultation with the UPSC.
l.
I

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
5. (Para 5.8.6) Allotment of Cadres to the All India Services
a. The following amendments should be made in the new Cadre Allocation
Policy (2008) for allocation of Cadre to candidates selected for the lAS:
i. At least one vacancy each year in each oft he cadres ofA GMUT70 (only
for the State ofA runachal Pradesh) Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram,
Nagaland, Sikkim and Tripura may be allotted to a successful
candidate domiciled therein provided he/she has opted for his/her
home State. This may be done even if there is no 'insider' vacancy in
these cadres. '
ii. In case there is more than one eligible candidate, then the allotment
may be done in the order - ST, SC, 0 BC and General candidates, as
applicable to each state.
iii. Once the home State quota of the above-mentioned North Eastern
States is filled up, further allocation may be done as per the Cadre
Allocation Policy (2008), after making adjustments necessitated by
the changes recommended above.
6. (Para 5.9.6) The Union Public Service Commission
a. Promotion of officers through Departmental Promotion Committees
(DPC) , upto the level ofS election Grade may be delegated to the concerned
Departments. The UPSC should supervise the functioning of these DPCs
through periodic reviews, audit etc.
b. In the case of disciplinary proceedings, consultation with the UPSC
should be mandatory only in cases involving likely dismissal or removal
of a government servant.
7. (Para 6.8) Capacity Building
a. Every government servant should undergo a mandatory training at the
induction stage and also periodically during his/her career. Successful
completion of these trainings should be a minimum necessary condition
for confirmation in service and subsequent promotions. Mandatory
induction trainings should be prescribed for Group D staff also before
they are assigned postings.

Refurbishing of Personnel Administration - Scaling New Heights
b. A monitoring mechanism should be set up for overseeing the implementation
of the National Training Policy (1996).
c. The practice of having a 'Common Foundation Course' for all Group 'N
Services - generalist, specialized and technical, should continue. For Group
'B' and 'C' Services, the Institute of Secretarial Training and Management
(ISTM) may be developed as the nodal agency for design and delivery of
common Foundation Courses.
d. All civil servants should undergo mandatory training before each promotion
and each officer/official should be evaluated after each training programme.
Successful completion of the training programmes should be made
mandatory for promotions.
e. The objective of mid-career training should be to develop domain
knowledge and competence required for the changing job profile of the
officer. To this end, mid career learning opportunities relevant to specific
domains or specializations should be made available for officers.
f. Public servants should be encouraged to obtain higher academic
qualifications and to write papers for reputed and authoritative journals.
g. A strong network oft raining institutions at the Union and State levels needs
to be built up to cater to the training requirements of civil servants. However,
instead of spreading resources over a large number of institutions, a few
institutions should be identified for capacity building and upgradation.
h. The composition of governing bodies of the national training institutions
such as the LBSNAA, SVPNPA, IGNFA and also the State Administrative
Training Institutes should be broadened by inducting eminent experts.
The governing bodies should be adequetely empowered to enable them to
discharge their functions efficiendy.
i. A national institute of good governance may be set up by upgrading one
of the existing national/state institutes. This institute would identify,
document, and disseminate best practices and also conduct training
programmes.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
8. (Para 7.3.3) Recruitment at Group 'B' Level
a. Each Department, dealing with both the general as well as specialized
Services (Group B), may set up committees to examine what changes
are required in the system of recruitment and promotions to these posts.
Prima-facie the Commission is of the view that in order to infuse fresh
thinking, a certain percentage ofv acancies (say 25% every year) at the level
of Section Officer as well as for other specialized Group 'B' posts, should
be filled through 'Direct Recruitment'.
9. (Para 7.5.7) Recruitment at Graduate Level (Group 'B' non-gazetted and Group 'C')
a. The age limit for all positions (Group 'B' non-gazetted and Group 'C') -
requiring a graduate degree -should be 20-25 years for general candidates with
a relaxation of three years for aBC and five years for SC!ST and physically
challenged candidates.
b. The examination system should be based on a well designed objective type
question paper.
c. There is no need to conduct separate examinations for posts (Group 'B' non
gazetted and Group 'C') which require a graduate degree. There should be
a common examination and thereafter, the candidates should be allowed to
apply for various posts with this examination score.
10. (Para 7.6.6) Recruitment for LDCs
a. The Commission endorses the stand taken by the Government that recruitment
of LDCs should be phased out.
b. In case it is felt necessary to recruit LDCs in certain organizations! departments,
especially in field offices, their recruitment should be done through the Staff
Selection Commission. The existing recruitment process needs to be modified
on the following lines:
i. The minimum qualification should be class 12th pass or equivalent.
li. The test should comprise of objective type questions.

Returbishing of Personnel Administration - Seating New Heights
ill. Short listed candidates should be administered a skills test. This should
be conducted on computers so that the capability of the candidates to
use word processing softwares is also assessed.
11. (Para 7.7.10) Training for Group 'B' and 'C' Employees
a. Unless a government employee undergoes mandatory induction training he!
she should not be assigned any regular post.
b. Successful completion ofp rescribed training courses should be a pre-condition
for all promotions.
c. All training programmes should be concluded with an evaluation of the
trainees' performance, and this should be an input while assessing their annual
performance.
12. (Para 7.8.6) Group 'B' and 'C' Employees: Promotions
a. The posts of Assistants under the Central Secretariat Service should be filled
in the ratio of 40 per cent by promotion from UDCs of Central Secretariat
Clerical Service Cadre, 40 per cent by Direct Recruitment and 20 per cent
through Limited Departmental Competitive Examination.
13. (Para 7.9.6) Group 'B' and 'C' Employees: Performance Appraisal
a. The Appraisal Form should provide the Reporting Officer with multiple options
on the level of performance against which he!s he would indicate numerically
the level at which the officer reported upon has performed.
b. The proforma oft he Confidential Reports ofG roup B and C posts may include
a column wherein the area/field of interest of the official reported upon (i.e.
Health, Information Technology, Finance, Transport, Defence etc) is indicated,
which may be considered for future postings.
c. A mechanism of acknowledging the receipt of the ACR proforma at
various stages may be adopted so that delays are avoided and an element of
accountability is intrvduced.
~ I

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
13. ( Para 8.7) Placement at Middle Management Level
a. In posting officers in Government of India, the primary consideration
should be to select the most suitable person for the post that is on offer.
b. Domains should be assigned by the Central Civil Services Authority (the
Commission has recommended the constitution of this Authority in
paragraph No 9.8 of this Report) to all officers of the All India Services
and the Central Civil Services on completion of 13 years of service.
c. The Central Civil Services Authority should invite applications from all
officers who have completed the minimum qualifying years of service,
for assignment of domains. The applications should specify the academic
background of officers, their research accomplishments (if any) and
significant achievements during their career, relevant to the domain applied
for. A consultative process should be put in place where the officers should
be interviewed and their claims to specific domains evaluated. The Authority
should thereafter assign domains to the officers on the basis of this exercise.
In case some domains do not attract applicants, the Authority should assign
these domains to officers with the relevant knowledge and experience.
d. All vacancies arising at the level of Deputy Secretary/Director during
a financial year should be identified well before the beginning of that
financial year, by the Department of Personnel and Training (DOPT).
The Ministries concerned should also give a brief job description for these
positions. All these posts and their job description should be notified to
the cadre controlling authorities of the concerned All India Services and
Central Services. On receipt of nominations from the cadre controlling
authorities, the DOPT should try to match the requirements of various
positions with the competencies of the officers in the 'offer list'. The
DOPT should then seek approval for the entire list from the Competant
Authority.
e. The Central Civil Services Authority should be charged with the
responsibility off ixing tenure for all civil service positions and this decision
of the Authority should be binding on Government.
I "

Refurbishing of Personnel Administration - Scaling New Heights
f. Officers from the organized services should not be given 'non-field'
assignments in the first 8-10 years of their career.
g. State Governments should take steps to constitute State Civil Services
Authorities on the lines of the Central Civil Services Authority.
14. (Para 9.8) Placement at Top Management Level
a. The present empanelment system for short listing officers for posting at
a. The present empanelment system for short-listing officers for
posting at the SAG level and above should be replaced by a more transparent
and objective placement procedure.
b. At higher levels in government, it is necessary to ensure that the tasks
assigned to a public servant match his/her domain competence as well as
aptitude and potential.
c. Ministries should classify all of their SAG level posts according to their
relevant functional domains.
d. There is need to introduce competition for senior positions in government
(SAG and above) by opening these positions in Government (including
attached and subordinate offices) to all Services. This principle would apply
to all posts including those that are presently encadred with the organised
Group 'N Services. In order to operationalise this, government should
make the continued participation of any of the organised civil services in
the Central Staffing Scheme, contingent upon the implementation of this
principle in those Departments/Cadres.
i. For the positions at the Joint Secretary/SAG level and above, the
Central Civil Services Authority would invite applications from
amongst all the eligible officers froni the All India Services and
Group 'N Central Services which are participating in the scheme.
ii. For positions at the HAG level and above, the Central Public Service
Authoritywould, in consultation with Government, earmark positions
for which outside talent would be desirable. Applications to fill up
these posts would be invited from interested and eligible persons
from the open market and also, from serving eligible officers.

f
Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
iii. While carrying out this exercise, the Central Civil Services Authority
would stipulate the eligibility criteria, the required domain expertise
as well as the requirements of qualifications, seniority and work
experience. The Authority would conduct interviews to short-list
suitable officers for these posts. Government would make t:he final
selection on the basis of this shortlist.
e. A Central Civil Services Authority should be constituted under the
proposed Civil Services Bill. The Central Civil Services Authority shall
be a five-member body consisting of the Chairperson and four members
(including the member-secretary). The Authority should have a full time
Member-Secretary of the rank of Secretary to Government of India. The
Chairperson and members of the Authority should be persons of eminence
in public life and professionals with acknowledged contributions to
society. The Chairperson and members of the Authority shall be appointed
by the President on the recommendations of a Committee consisting of
the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition in the Lok Sabha.
(Explanation:- Where the Leader of the Opposition in the Lok Sabha '-'
has not been recognized as such, the Leader of the single largest group in
the Opposition in the Lok Sabha shall be deemed to be the Leader of the
Opposition) .
f. The Central Civil Services Authority should deal with matters of assignment
of domains to officers, preparing panels for posting of officers at the level
of Joint Secretary and above, fixing tenures for senior posts, deciding on
posts which could be advertised for lateral entry and such other matters
that may be referred to it by the Government.
g. A similar procedure should be adopted for filling up vacancies at SAG
level and higher in the central police agencies. For example, in the Central
Para-Military Forces the senior positions should be opened to competition
from officers of the CPMFs, IPS and the Armed Forces (including those
completing their Short Service Commissions). Similarly for the intelligence
agencies officers from the armed forces as well as the CPOs with experience
in the field of intelligence should be considered for postings at higher levels
in the intelligence agencies.

Refurbishing of Personnel Administration - Scaling New Heights
15. (Para 10.12) Deputation of Civil Servants to Organizations Outside
Government
I.. .. a • In drawing up the list of external organizations to which government
servants can be permitted to go on deputation, the primary consideration
should be the objectives and activities ofs uch organizations and not merely
its organizational structure. For the present Government should permit
deputation of civil servants only to such organizations that are engaged
in non-profit making activities.
b. This policy may be reviewed after three years.
16. (Para 11.15) Performance Management System
a. A good employee performance appraisal system is a pre-requisite for an
effective performance management system. The existing performance
appraisal system should be strengthened on the following lines:
• Making appraisal more consultative and transparent - performance
appraisal systems for all Services should be modified on the lines of the
recently introduced PAR for the All India Services.
• Performance appraisal formats to be made job specific - the appraisal
format prescribed for civil servants should have three sections i.e. (i) a
generic section that meets the requirements of a particular service to
which the officer belongs, (ii) another section based on the goals and
requirements of the department in which he!s he is working, and (iii) a
final section which captures the specific requirements and targets relating
to the post that the officer is holding.
• Performance appraisal should be year round: provIsions for
detailed work-plan and a mid-year review should be introduced for
all Services.
• Guidelines need to be formulated for assigning numerical rating:
DOPT should formulate detailed guidelines to guide the reporting and
reviewing officers for assigning numerical ratings for their subordinates.
Training modules for implementing performance management systems
should be designed and introduced for training programmes for civil
servants.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
b. Government should expand the scope of the present performance appraisal
system of its employees to a comprehensive performance management
system (PMS).
c. In implementing PMS in government, it must be emphasized that the PMS
should be designed within the overall strategic framework appropriate to
the particular ministry/d epartment/o rganization. It is also necessary to
link individual contributions to strategic objectives of the organization.
It will therefore be necessary for each ministry/department/organization
to customize its PMS relevant to them, while incorporating the general
features described in Chapter 11.
d. Annual performance agreements should be signed between the departmental
minister and the Secretary of the ministry/heads of departments, providing
physical and verifiable details of the work to be done during a financial
year. The actual performance should be assessed by a third party - say,
the Central Public Services Authority - with reference to the annual
performance agreement. The details of the annual performance agreements
and the result of the assessment by the third party should be provided to
the legislature as a part of the Performance Budget/Outcome Budget.
17. (Para 12.5) Motivating'Civil Servants
a. There is need to recognise the outstanding work of serving civil servants
including through National awards. Awards for recognizing good
performance should also be instituted at the State and district levels. It
~ust be ensu!"ed that selection for such awards is made through a prompt,
objective and transparent mechanism because the value of such awards
should not get compromised by either subjectivity or lack of transparency.
Further, all organizations should evolve their own in-house mechanism for
rewarding good performance from simple, verbal and written appreciation
to more tangible rewards.
b. Selections for foreign assignments referred to in Paragraph 12.4.3.2
should be made, based on the recommendations of the Central Civil
Services Authority. The Authority should follow the due process of inviting
applications from eligible candidates and preparing a panel of officers who
are most suitable for such assignments.

.'
Refurbishing of Personnel Administration - Scaling New Heights
c. It should be the responsibility of the head of the office to examine the job
content of each person working in the organization to ensure that the job
content is meaningful and challenging so that the employee derives a sense
of satisfaction in performing the tasks assigned to him/her. The head of the
office could seek the assistance of a professional agency for this purpose.
d. Each head of office should ensure that a congenial work environment
is created in the office. His/her success in this should be an element in
evaluating his/her performance.
18. (Para 13.4) Accountability
a. A system oft wo intensive reviews - one on completion of 14 years ofs ervice,
and another on completion of 20 years of service - should be established
for all government servants.
b. The first review at 14 years would primarily serve the purpose of intimating
to the public servant about his/her strengths and shortcomings for his/
her future advancement. The second review at 20 years would mainly
serve to assess the fitness of the officer for his/her further continuation
in government service. The detailed modalities of this assessment system
would need to be worked out by government.
c. The services of public servants, who are found to be unfit after the second
review at 20 years, should be discontinued. A provision regarding this should
be made in the proposed Civil Services Law. Besides, for new appointments
it should be expressly provided that the period of employment shall be for
20 years. Further continuance in government service would depend upon
the outcome of the intensive performance reviews.
19. (Para 14.6) Disciplinary Proceedings
a. In the proposed Civil Services law, the minimum statutary disciplinary
and dismissal procedures required to satisfy the criteria of natural justice
should be spelt out leaving the details of the procedure to be followed
to the respective government departments. The present oral inquiry
process should be converted into a disciplinay meeting or interview
to be conducted by a superior officer in a summary manner without
the trappings and procedures borrowed from court trials. This would

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
require that the CCS (CCA) Rules, 1965 be repealed and substituted by
appropriate regulations.
b. No penalty of removal and dismissal should be imposed, except by an
Authority, which is at least three levels above the post which the government
servant is holding. Other penalities - apart from dismissal and removal
- may be imposed by an Authority which is at least two levels above the
current post of the government servant. No penality may be imposed,
unless an inquiry is conducted and the accused government servant has
been given an opportunity of being heard.
evc
c. The two-stage consultation with the in cases involving a vigilance
angle should be done away with and only the second stage advice after
completion of the disciplinary process, should be obtained. In addition,
for cases involving a vigilance angle, no consulta.tion with the UPSC should
be required.
d. Consultation with the UPSC should be mandatory only in cases leading
to the proposed dismissal of government servants and all other types of
disciplinary cases should be exempted from the UPSC's purview.
20. (Para 15.6) Relations between the Political Executive and Civil Servants
a. There is a need to safeguard the political neutrality and impartiality of the
civil services. The onus for this lies equally on the political executive and
the civil services. This aspect should be included in the Code of Ethics for
Ministers as well as the Code of Conduct for Public Servants.
b. The Commission would like to reiterate its recommendation made in
its Report on "Ethics in Governance" while examining the definition of
corruption under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, wherein it has
been recommended that "abuse of authority unduly favouring or harming
someone" and "obstruction of justice" should be classified as an offence
under the Act.
c. It is essential to lay down certain norms for recruitment in government to
avoid complaints of favouritism, nepotism, corruption and abuse of power.
These norms are:

Refurbishing of Personnel Administration - Scaling New Heights
i. Well-defined procedure for recruitment to all government jobs.
ii. Wide publicity and open competition for recruitment to all posts.
iii. Minimisation, if not elimination, of discretion in the recruitment
process.
iv. Selection primarily on the basis of written examination or on the
basis of performance in existing public/board/university examination
with minimum weight to interview.
These principles could be included in the 'Civil Services Bill' as
recommended by the Commission in Chapter 17.
21. (Para 16.17) Civil Services Code
a. 'Civil Services Values' and the 'Code of Ethics' should be incorporated in
the proposed Civil Services Bill.
b. Conduct Rules for civil servants need to be redrawn based on the values
and code of ethics as outlined in this Chapter (Chapter 16).
22. (Para 17.5) The Civil Services Law
A new Civil Services Bill may be drafted. The following salient features may be included
in the proposed Bill:
I. Title oft he Bill: The Bill may be called 'The Civil Services Bill'.
II. Definitions: "Civil Services" shall comprise of all personnel holding civil
posts under the Union.
III. Civil Service Values: The Civil Services and the Civil Servants shall be
guided by the following values in addition to a commitment to uphold
the Constitution, the discharge of their functions:
i. Absolute integrity at all times
ii. Impartiality and non-partisanship
iii. Objectivity

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
iv. Dedication to public service
v. Empathy towards weaker sections
The Heads of Departments shall be responsible for promoting these values in
their organizations. The Central Civil Services Authority may from time to time
review the adoption, adherence to and implementation of the Civil Service Values
in the departments or organizations under the Union.
Iv. Code ofE thics: The following should be included in the Code of Ethics for
civil servants:
i. Integrity: Civil servants should be guided solely by public interest
in their official decision making and not by any financial or other
consideration either in respect of themselves, their families or their
friends.
ii. Impartiality: Civil servants in carrying out their official work,
including functions like procurement, recruitment, delivery of
services etc, should take decisions based on merit and free from any
partisan consideration.
iii. Commitment to public service: civil servants should deliver services
in a fair, effective, impartial and courteous manner.
iv. Open accountability: civil servants are accountable for their decisions
and actions and should be willing to subject themselves to appropriate
scrutiny for this purpose.
v. Devotion to duty: civil servants should maintain absolute and
unstinting devotion towards their duties and responsibilities at all
times.
vi. Exemplary behaviour: civil servants should treat all members of the
public with respect and courtesy and at all times should behave in a
manner that upholds the rich traditions of the civil services.
V. Recruitment and Conditions of Service: Recruitment and conditions of
service of persons appointed to the 'Public Services' shall be governed by
Rules made under this Act. The following principles of recruitment should
be included for all appointments not routed through the UPSC or SSC:

Refurbishing of Personnel Administration - ScaLing New Heights
i. Well-defined merit based procedure for recruitment.
ii. Wide publicity and open competition for recruitment to all posts.
iii. Minimisation, if not elimination, of discretion in the recruitment
process.
iv. Selection primarily on the basis of written examination or on the
basis of performance in existing public/board/university examination
with minimum weight-age to interview.
An independent agency should audit the recruitments made outside the UPSC
and SSC systems and advise the government suitably. This audit should be
conducted under the supervision of the UPSC.
VI. New Conditions ofA ppointment: (1) A civil servant, not being a civil servant
recruited or inducted for a short-term appointment, shall hold office for
twenty years from the date of initial appointment. (2) The relationship
between the Civil Servant and the Government of India during the time he/
she holds office shall also be governed by the rules made in this regard. All
public servants shall be subjected to two intensive reviews on completion
of 14 years and 20 years of service respectively. Their further continuance
beyond 20 years will depend on the outcome of these reviews. It should
be expressly provided that all new recruitments shall be for a period of
20 years and their continuance beyond 20 years would depend on the
outcome of the intensive reviews.
VII. Appointment to Senior Positions in Government: All positions in Government
(including in the attached and subordinate offices) at the level of
Joint Secretary and above would constitute the 'Senior Management
Pool'. This would apply to all posts including those that are presently
encadred with the organised Group A Services. All appointments to
positions in this pool shall be made on the recommendations of the Central
Civil Services Authority, which would go into the past performance and
l
also evaluate the future potential of an officer. The Central Civil Services
Authority should recommend a panel of officers suitable for a position in
the Government and Government should choose an officer/person from
,.
this panel.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
VIII. Fixation ofT enures: All senior posts should have a specified tenure. The task
of fixing tenures for various posts may also be assigned to this independent
agency - Central Civil Services Authority.
IX. Widening the Pool of Candidates for Selection to Senior Positions:
Candidates outside the government system should be allowed to compete
for certain posts at senior levels (Additional Secretary and above). The task
of identifying these posts should be entrusted to the Central Civil Services
Authority.
x.
Dismissal, Removal etc. ofC ivil Servants: After the repeal ofA rticles 310 and
311 (as recommended in the Report on 'Ethics in Governance'), safeguards
against arbitrary action against government servants should be provided
in the new law. These safeguards should include:
i. No penalty of removal and dismissal should be imposed, except by
an authority, which is at least three levels above the post which the
government servant is holding.
ii. Other penalties - apart from dismissal and removal-may be imposed
by an authority which is at least two levels above the current post of
the government servant.
iii. No penalty may be imposed, unless an enquiry is conducted and the
accused government servant has been given an opportunity of being
heard.
iv. The Head of an organization should have powers to lay down the
details of the enquiry procedure, subject to the general guidelines
which may be issued by the Government from time to time.
XI. A performance management system should be mandatory for every
organization in the government.
XII. Constitution oft he Central Civil Services Authority:
i. The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute a body to be known as the Central Civil Services Authority
to exercise the powers conferred on, and to perform the functions
assigned to it, under this Act.

Refurbishing of Personnel Administration - Scaling New Heights
ii. The Central Civil Services Authority shall be a five-member body
consisting of the Chairperson and four members (including the
member-secretary). The Authority should have a full time Member
Secretary of the rank of Secretary to Government of India. The
Chairperson and members of the Authority should be persons
of eminence in public life and professionals with acknowledged
contributions to society. The Chairperson and members of the
Authority shall be appointed by the President on the recommendations
of a Committee consisting of the Prime Minister and the Leader of
the Opposition in the Lok Sabha. (Explanation:-Where the Leader
of the Opposition in the Lok Sabha has not been recognized as such,
the Leader of the single largest group in the opposition in the Lok
Sabha shall be deemed to be the Leader of the Opposition).
XIII. Functions of the Central Civil Services Authority: The Central Authority
shall discharge the following functions:
i. Review the adoption, adherence to and implementation of the Civil
Service Values in the departments or organizations under the Central
Government and send reports to the Central Government.
ii. Assign domains to all officers of the All India Services and the Central
Civil Services on completion of 13 years of service.
iii. Formulate norms and guidelines for appointments at 'Senior
Management Level' in Government of India.
iv. Evaluate and recommend names of officers for posting at the 'Senior
Management Level' in Government of India.
v. Identify the posts at 'Senior Management Level' in Government
of India which could be thrown open for recruitment from all
sources.
vi. Fix the tenure for posts at the 'Senior Management Level' in
Government of India.
vii. Submit an annual report to Parliament.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
XIv. Creation of Executive Agencies in Government: Government should be
authorized to create or reorganize some or all of existing Departments
into 'Executive Agencies'. The role of the Ministries should primarily be on
policy formulation while implementation should be left to the Executive
Agencies.

PROMOTING e-GOVERNANCE
- The SMART \Vay Forward
1. (Para 6.2.2) Building a Congenial Environment
a. Building a congenial environment is a sine qua non for successful
implementation of e-Governance initiatives. This should be achieved by:
i. Creating and displaying a will to change within the government
ii. Providing political support at the highest level
iii. Incentivising e-Governance and overcoming the resistance to change
within government
iv. Creating awareness in the public with a view to generating a demand
for change.
2. (Para 6.3.9) Identification of e-Governance Projects and Prioritisation
a. Government organizationsld epartments at Union and State Government
levels need to identify e-Governance initiatives which could be undertaken
within their functional domain, keeping the needs of the citizens in mind.
Such initiatives may be categorized as follows:
i. Initiatives which would provide timely and useful information to
the citizens.
ii. Initiatives which would not require the deation of a database for
providing useful services to the citizens.(1ius may include initiatives
where database may be created prospectively without waiting for the
updation of historical data.
iii. Initiatives which allow for making elementary online transactions
including payment for services.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
I'"
l
iv. Initiatives which require verification of information!d ata submitted
online.
v. Initiatives which require creation and integration of complex
databases.
b. Instead of implementing all such initiatives at one go, these should be
implemented after prioritizing them on the basis of ease of implementation,
which would generally follow the categories mentioned above in that order.
However, suitable modifications in their prioritization may be made by
organizations!d epartments on the basis of the needs of and likely impact
on citizens.
c. Respective Departments of Information Technology at the Union and
State Government levels should coordinate between organizations and
provide technical support if needed, in the task of identification and
prioritisation.
3. (Para 6.4.16) Business Process Re-engineering
a. For every function a government organisation performs and every service
or information it is required to provide, there should be a step-by-step
analysis of each process to ensure its rationality and simplicity.
b. Such analysis should incorporate the viewpoints of all stakeholders, while
maintaining the citizen-centricity of the exercise.
c. After identifying steps which are redundant or which require simplification,
and which are adaptable to e-Governance, the provisions of the law, rules,
regulations, instructions, codes, manuals etc. which form their basis should
also be identified.
d. Following this ex;ercise, governmental forms, processes and structures
should be re-designed to make them adaptable to e-Governance, backed
by procedural, institutional and legal changes.

way
Promoting e-Governance - 1he SMART Forward
4. (Para 6.5.22) Capacity Building and Creating Awareness
a. Capacity building efforts must attend to both the organizational capacity
building as also the professional and skills upgradation of individuals
associated with the implementation of e-Governance projects.
b. Each government organization must conduct a capacity assessment which
should form the basis for training their personnel. Such capacity assessment
may be carried out by the State Department of Information Technology
in case of State Governments, and the Union Department of Information
Technology in the Centre. Organisations should prepare a roadmap for
enhancing the capabilities of both their employees and the organization.
c. A network of training institutions needs to be created in the States with the
Administrative Training Institutes at the apex. The Administrative Training
Institutes in various States should take up capacity building programmes
in e-Governance, by establishing strong e-Governance wings. ATIs need
to be strengthened under the NeGP'
d. State Governments should operationalise the Capacity Building Roadmap
(CBRMs), under the overall guidance and support of the D IT, Government
of India.
e. Lessons learnt from previous successful e-Governance initiatives should be
incorporated in training programmes.
f. The recommendations made by the Commission in its Second Report
entitled 'Unlocking Human Capital' in paragraph (5.2.1.6) should be
adopted for creating awareness among people with regard to e-Governance
initiatives.
5. (Para 6.6.2.10) Developing Technological Solutions
a. There is a need to:
i. Develop a national e-Governance 'enterprise architecture' framework
as has been done in some countries.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
ii. Promote the use of 'enterprise architecture' in the successful
implementation of e-Governance initiatives; this would require
building capacity of top level managers in all government
organizations.
6. (Para 6.7.2.7) Implementation
a. All organizations should carry out a periodic independent evaluation of
the information available on their webs ites from the citizens perspective
and then re-design their webs ites on the basis of the feedback obtained.
b. Each government organization should prepare a time-bound plan for
providing of transactional information through their websites. To begin
with, this could be done by updating the websites at regular intervals, while
at the same time, re-engineering the back-end processes and putting them
on computer networks. Ultimately, all the back-end processes should be
computerized.
c. Complex e-Governance projects should be planned and implemented like
any major project having several parts ! components for which Project
Management capability should be developed in-house.
d. Implementation of e-Govemance projects would involve a detailed 'project
management' exercise which would consist of the following activities:
i. Breaking up entire e-Governance projects into components!
activities
ii. Planning each activity in detail
iii. Allocating resources, both human and financial
iv. Commencement of activities as per the plan and continuous
tracking
v. Need-based mid-course correction
e. While implementing transformational programmes like the NeGp, it
is essential to recognise of the importance of a structured approach to
Change Management - the people side oft ransformation. It is necessary for
Govenunent agencies, especially the nodal Ministries and the Administrative

Promoting e-Governance - The SMART 'Way Forward
Reforms and IT Departments, to design appropriate Change Management
Strategies and Plans to accompany the e-Governance implementation.
7. (Para 6.8.3) Monitoring and Evaluation
a. Monitoring of e-Governance projects should be done by the implementing
organization during implementation in the manner in which project
monitoring is done for large infrastructure projects. Even after the project
has been implemented, constant monitoring would be required to ensure
as
that each component is functioning per the design.
b. Evaluation of success or failure of e-Governance projects may be done by
independent agencies on the basis of parameters fixed beforehand.
8. (Para 6.9.5) Institutional Framework for Coordination and Sharing of Resourcesl
Information
a. The Departments of Information Technology at the Union and State
Government levels should provide institutional support to other
departments and organizations in implementation of e-Governance
projects identified and conceptualized by them. The DIT should focus on
the following:
1. Conducting an e-preparedness audit for each organization
2. Enforcing standardization
3. Assisting in co-ordination when e-Governance projects transcend an
organisation's functional domain
4. Carrying out evaluation of e-Governance projects
5. Acting as a repository of best practices and encouraging horizontal
replication of successful projects
6. Helping in selection of technological solutions.
b. The Second Schedule to the Government of India Allocation of Business
Rules, 1961 may be suitably amended to incorporate these elements with
regard to the subject matter of 'e-Governance'.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
9. (Para 6.10.6) Public-Private Partnership (PPP)
a. Several components of e-Governance projects lend themselves to the
Public-Private Partnership (PPP) mode. In all such cases (PPP) should
be the preferred mode.
b. The private partner should be selected through a transparent process.
The roles and responsibilities of government as well as the private partner
should be dearly laid down in the initial stage itself, leaving no room for
any ambiguity.
10. (Para 6.11.2) Protecting C __~ tical Information Infrastructure Assets
a. There is need to develop a critical information infrastructure assets
protection strategy. This should be supplemented with improved analysis
and warning capabilities as well as improved information sharing on threats
and vulnerabilities.
11. (Para 7.3.2.3.16) The Common Support Infrastructure
a. As recommended by the Standing Committee on Information Technology
in its 58th Report, the State Data Centres (SDCs) should be maintained
by Government agencies such as NIC as it involves handling of sovereign
data. Further, all data centres at the State level should be subsumed in the
SDCs.
b. The implementation ofSDCs, SWANs and CSCs should be co-ordinated
to prevent significant time-lag between their operationalisation. Last mile
connectivity issues involved in operationalisation of CSCs should also be
addressed in a time-bound manner.
c. Gram Panchayats should be involved in monitoring the operation of
the Common Services Centres in the first four years of their operation
when they are receiving revenue support from government for providing
'Government to Citizen' services. They should proactively engage in making
citizens aware of the services provided through the CSCs and encourage
them to make use of them.
d. State Governments should make available a large bouquet of G2C
services through the CSCs. In doing so, they should adopt the approach

Promoting e-Governance - The SMART way Forward
outlined in this Report while discussing identification and prioritization
of e-Governance projects.
e. The Mission Mode Project on Gram Panchayats should be finalized and
implemented in a time-bound manner. The MMP should incorporate the
recommendations made by the Commission in its Sixth Report entitled
'Local Governance', in paragraphs 3.10.2.8 and 4.5.5.6.
12. (Para 7.3.3.8) Mission Mode Projects
a. State Governments should first provide a dear mandate for governance
reforms that must precede the e-Governance initiatives. This would
involve, if necessary, changing procedures and even structures and statutes.
Therefore as a first step, these issues need to be analysed, decision points
identified and political approval taken.
b. The major decisions involved in (a) above should be identified by the State
Level Apex Committee and approval of the State Government obtained
within six months.
c. The Secretaries of the concerned departments should be entrusted with
the responsibility of project implementation in unambiguous terms. They
should be provided with the requisite authority and resources for project
implementation.
d. Thereafter, the business process re-engineering and capacity building
exercise should be completed by the concerned department within a
maximum period of one year. The IT component of these projects should
not be funded until this step is completed.
e. The Annual Performance Appraisal Report (APR) of public servants
entrusted with the responsibility of project implementation under NeGP
should have a separate entry for evaluation of their performance in this
regard.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
13. (Para 7.3.4.1.23) Mission Mode Project on Computerisation of Land Records
a. Surveys and measurements need to be carried out in a mission mode
utilizing modern technology to arrive at a correct picture of land holdings
and land parcels and rectification of outdated maps.
b. This needs to be accompanied by an analysis of the existing mechanism for
updating land records - which varies from State to State - to be supplanted
by an improved and strengthened mechanism which ensures that all future
transactions in titles are immediately reflected in the land records. Such a
system should be able to detect changes in titles through various means -
namely, succession, will, partition, gift, survivorship etc and update records
accordingly.
c. The dispute resolution mechanism with regard to land titles needs to be
strengthened in order to be compatible with the demands made on it.
d. In case of urban areas, a similar exercise needs to be undertaken especially
since measurements and surveys have not been done in many of such areas
and even record of titles is not available in most cities.
14. (Para 7.3.4.2.7) Passport & Visa MMP
a. The entire passport issue process needs to be put on an e-Governance mode
in phases. As the processes which precede and follow the police verification
have already been re-engineered and put in e-Governance mode, this may
be integrated with online police and citizen identification data bases. In
the mean time, the process of police verification should be streamlined
and made time bound.
15. (Para 7.3.4.3.12) Unique National Identity Number/Card
a. The proposed Unique ID Authority should evolve a database of
UIDs on the basis of permanent identifiers such as date of birth, place of
birth etc. as described in paragraph 7.3.4.3.11.
16. (Para 8.2) Legal Framework for e-Governance
a. A clear road map with a set ofm il~ones should be outlined by Government
of India with the ultimate objective of transforming the citizen-government
-
~

way
Promoting e-Governance - 1he SMART Forward
interaction at all levels to the e-Governance mode by 2020. This may be
enshrined in a legal framework keeping'i n consideration the mammoth
dimension of the task, the levels of required coordination between the
Union and State Governments and the diverse field situations in which it
would be implemented.
b. The legal framework should, inter alia, include provisions regarding:
i. Definition of e-Governance, its objectives and role in the Indian
context;
ii. Parliamentary oversight mechanism;
iii. Mechani~m for co-ordination between government organizations at
Union 'and State levels;
iv. Role, functions and responsibilities of government organizations
with regard to e-Governance initiatives, especially business process
re-engineering;
v. Financial arrangements;
vi. Specifying the requirements of a strategic control framework for
e-Government projects dealing with the statutory and sovereign
functions of government;
vii. Framework for digital security and data protection; and
viii. Responsibility for selection and adoption of standards and inter
operability framework.
c. This legislation should have an overarching framework and be able to
provide flexibility to organizations.
17. (Para 9.5) Knowledge Management
a. Union and State Governments should take proactive measures for
establishing Knowledge Management systems as a pivotal step for
administrative reforms in general and e-Governance in particular.

CITIZEN CENTRIC ADMINISTRATION
- The Heart ofG overnance
1. Functions of Government
(Para 3.3.4)
a. Government organisations should adhere to the principles highlighted in
paragraph 3.2.4 while performing regulatory functions.
b. Government agencies, whether regulatory or developmental, should
introduce the Single Window Agency concept within their organisations
to minimize delays and maximize convenience to citizens. Government as
a whole should draw a roadmap with timelines for expeditious creation of
a single window at the local level for provision of all developmental and
regulatory services to citizens.
(Para 3.4.2)
a. The principle of subsidiarity should be followed while deciding on the
implementation machinery for any programme.
b. Citizens should be actively involved in all stages of these programmes i.e.
planning, implementation and monitoring.
c. Mandatory social audit should be carried out for all progrmames.
d. Impact assessment should be carried out for all programmes at periodic
intervals.
2. (Para 4.6.10) Making Citizens' Charters Effective - An Agenda for Reform
Citizens' Charters should be made effective by adopting the following
principles:
i. One size does notf it all.

Citizen Centric Administration - The Heart o/Governance
ii. Citizens' Charter should be preparedf or each independent unit under
the overall umbrella oft he organisations' charter.
iii. Wide consultation which include Civil Society in the process.
iv. Firm commitments to be made.
v. Internal processes and structure should be reformed to meet the
commitments given in the Charter.
vi. Redressal mechanism in case ofd efault.
vii. Periodic evaluation ofC itizens' Charters.
viii. Benchmark using end-user feedback.
ix. Hold officers accountable for results.
3. (Para 4.9.9) The ARC Seven-Step Model for Citizen Centricity
a. The Union and State Governments should make the seven-step model
outlined in paragraph 4.9, mandatory for all organizations having public
interface.
4. (Para 5.7.4) Citizen's Participation in Administration
a. It should be mandatory for all government organizations to develop a
suitable mechanism for receipt of suggestions from citizens, which could
range from the simple 'Suggestion Box' to periodic consultations with
citizens' groups. Heads of the concerned organizations should ensure
rigorous follow up action on the suggestions received so that these become
a meaningful exercise. A system of incentives and rewards should be
introduced so that suggestions that lead to significant improvement or
savings can be acknowledged.
b. Every government organization must ensure the following: (i) fool-proof
system for registration of all complaints, (ii) a prescribed time schedule for
response and resolution, and (iii) a monitoring and evaluation mechanism
to ensure that the norms, prescribed are complied with. Use of tools of
information technology can help to make such a system more accessible for
citizens. Heads of all government organizations should be made responsible

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
for ensuring the development of such a system for responding to a time
bound resolution of the complaints of citizens.
c. Regular citizens' feedback and survey and citizens' report cards should be
evolved by all government organisations for gauging citizens' responses to
their services. These should be used as inputs for improving organizational
efficiency.
d. While no single modality or mechanism can be prescribed for encouraging
citizens' participation in governance; in general, there is need to create
institutionalized mechanisms for encouraging their participation in
governance across public agencies at all levels and, for this to happen, the
following steps are necessary:
i. A comprehensive review of policy and practice in each department/
public agency.
ii. Modifying administrative procedures where necessary.
iii. Entrustment of the function of institutionalizing citizens'
participation in governance to a senior level officer.
iv. Performance management reviews to incorporate effectiveness in
ensuring citizens' participation in governance.
e. The objective could also be served by active and cooperative participation
by government agencies in civil society initiatives in the area of citizens'
participation in grievance redressal.
5. (Para 5.10) Participation ofW omen and the Physically Challenged
a. Ensuring the full participation ofw omen should be a specific aim of citizen
centric administration and this should be reflected in various policies
and programmes, including citizens' charters and grievances redressal
mechanisms.
b. Government may constitute an expert committee to identify the areas
where special provisions for the physically challenged should be made
mandat-ory. These areas could be reviewed and expanded every five years.
c. Government should adopt a more proactive approach for detection and
registration of the physically challenged persons.

Citizen Centric Administration - The Heart of Governance
d. To achieve this, responsibility should be cast on the Primary Health
Centres (PHCs) to identify all such cases in their jurisdiction and to get the
evaluation of the disabilities done. To enable the PHCs to discharge these
responsibilities, adequate resources should be placed at the disposal of the
Medical Officer, PHC along with delegation of commensurate authority
and changes in the relevant rules.
e. Organization of camps at PHC level, attended by the concerned medical
personnel, would greatly help in issuing certificates of disability on the
spot.
f. Further, steps should be taken to create a database for all the Disabilities
Certificate holders with integration at District, State and National levels.
6. (Para 6.8) Delegation
a. Based on the principle ofs ubsidiarity, each government organization should
carry out an exercise to assess whether adequate delegation of authority has
been done. In doing so, it should be dearly enunciated that the top levels
of the organization should essentially focus on policy making functions
and the field level functionaries should focus on operational aspects.
b. The extent to which delegated powers is used or is allowed to be used, should
be two of the elements while appraising an officer's overall performance.
7. (Para 7.9.3.3) Evolving an Effective Public Grievances Redressal System
a. There is need for a strong and effective internal grievance redressal
mechanism in each organization.
b. The Union and State Governments should issue directions asking all
public authorities to designate public grievance officers on the lines of
the Public Information Officers under the RTI Act. These officers
should be of adequate seniority and should be delegated commensurate
authority.
c. All grievance petitions received should be satisfactorily disposed of by these
officers within thirty days. Non-adherence to the time limit should invite
financial penalties.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
d. Each organization should designate an appellate authority and devolve
adequate powers upon them including the power to impose fines on the
defaulting officers.
8. (Para 7.10.3) Analysis and Identification of Grievance Prone Areas
a. Government organizations should analyse the complaints received and
identify the areas wherein interventions would be required so as to eliminate
the underlying causes that lead to public grievances. This exercise should
be carried out at regular intervals.
9. (Para 8.3.3) Consumer Protection
a. Lok Adalats would be effective in setding many consumer disputes. It
should be stipulated by law that cases up to a particular value, say Rupees
two lakhs, should first be referred to LokAdalats.
b. All Ministries!Departments need to examine the procedures regulating
grant of licenses, permissions or registration including the underlying
Acts, Rules, Notifications, etc. These should be recast with the following
underlying principles:
i. There should be an upper time limit for grant of any license!
permission!r egistration. The law should provide for penalties if an
application is not disposed of within the stipulated period.
ii. Applications should be processed only on a 'First in First out Basis' .
All applications received and pending should be put on the licensing
authority's website.
iii. Selecting units for surprise inspection should not be left to the
discretion of the inspecting officers. Each office should devise
an objective procedure to randomly select units for inspection.
Exceptions can be made in case of receipt of genuine complaints
against any unit.
iv. The outcome of all inspections must be immediately put in the public
domain.

Citizen Centric Administration - The Heart o/Governance
v. There should be an annual audit of the licensing and inspection
system each year by an independent agency.
vi. All licensing authorities should evolve an accessible system for receipt
of citizens' complaints.
10. (Para 9.10.4) Special Institution Mechanisms
a. A common format for making complaints before various statutory
Commissions should be devised in consultation with each other. This
format should capture the details of the victims and complainants in such
a way that it facilitates matching of data across different Commissions.
In case of complaints filed without the use of the common format, the
necessary fields may be filled up at the time of registration of cases itself
by the Commission receiving the complaint.
b. As recommended in paragraph 6.3.9 of the Commission's Eleventh Report
entitled 'Promoting e-Governance: the SMART Way Forward', each
statutory Commission should create an electronic database prospectively
and each database should be networked with each other to facilitate
comparison of data.
c. The Human Rights Commission {as defined in Section 3(3), PHRA}
should lay down norms to deal with complaints by the most appropriate
Commission. The basic principle could be that the dominant grievance in
a"c omplaint should lead to its handling by the appropriate Commission.
Nodal officers may be appointed in each Commission to identify and
coordinate action over such cases. Internal mechanistI:!J should be evolved
within each statutory Commission to facilitate the handling of such cases
in a coordinated manner.
d. The Union and State Governments should take proactive steps in dealing
with serious offences like custodial deaths/rapes etc on priority so that
their occurrence diminishes over the years. Help of NHRC may be taken
to prepare an action plan for this purpose.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
e. In the smaller States, a single 'multi-role' Commission may be constituted
which would carry out the specific functions of all the constitutional and
statutory Commissions at the State level.
f. A separate Standing Committee of Parliament may be constituted to look
into Annual Reports submitted by these statutory Commissions.
11. (Para 10.1.9) Simp~ifying Internal Procedures
a. All Ministrles)Departments should prepare a roadmap for carrying out
a process simplification exercise. This should involve changes in Rules,
Regulations and Laws wherever necessary. The entire exercise should be
completed within two years. Similarly, the Ministries/Departments should
instruct all organizations under their supervision to carry out this task.
State Governments should also be advised accordingly. This elaborate
exercise would involve the following steps for any organizations:
i. Constitution of an in-house core team of persons w'ell versed with
internal procedures.
ii. Engaging external experts - if necessary.
iii. Getting feedback from citizens.
iv. Analyzing all processes from the point of Jtecessity, simplicity,
rationality and citizen centricity.
v. Redesigning processes and forms.
vi. Doing a pilot study and getting it evaluated.
vii. Once the pilot stabilizes, analyzing the &!hanges required in the rules/
statutes.
viii. Implementing the change.
ix. Creating an incentivemechanigm for sustainiJll the change.
h. Structural change should he an integral part of any proass simplification
I
exercise.
v
« fft6te fsh .,

Citizen Centric Administration - The Heart a/Governance
12. (Para 10.4.4) Monitoring and Evaluation
a. The feedback from citizens should be used to monitor the performance of
government offices.
b. Each government office which has public interface should have an external
evaluation conducted annually in addition to those conducted by the
organization itself.
13. (Para 10.5.1.11) Rationalising Procedures
a. Ministry of Road Transport and Highways should constitute an expert
group to devise practical and objective tests of competence for issue of
driving licenses.
b. The conduct of these practical tests as well as the one prescribed for learner's
license could be outsourced. Close monitoring over their processes, would
however be required.
14. (Para 10.5.2.9) Registration of Births and Deaths
a. The emphasis under the Registration of Births and Deaths Act should
shift from compliance to prescribed procedures to achieving 100%
registration.
b. Registrars would need to adopt a more proactive approach, and it would be
necessary to cast a duty upon them to register each case of birth and death
within their jurisdiction irrespective oft he fact whether a formal application
has been received by them. The Registration could be done based on
information from any source or even suo-motu by the Registrar.
c. Sufficient number ofp ublic functionaries should be designated as Registrars
so that each one is assigned a manageable jurisdiction.
d. Each Registrar would need to be empowered under the law to seek and
obtain information from any person. For this purpose, the law should
provide that the Registrar shall have the power to issue notice seeking
information from any person, regarding births and deaths and that person
shall be bound to provide such information.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
e. In order to make the process of imposition of fines quick and deterrent,
the powers to levy fines should be given to the District Registrar.
f. There should be no fees for delayed registration. It should be provided
that in case of delayed registration, a more elaborate enquiry would be
required. The onus for conducting the enquiry should be on the Competent
Authority.
15. (Para 10.5.3.7) Building Licenses and Completion Certificates
a. Simplified procedures for grant of building permits on the basis of self
certification by owners I registered architects should be adopted by all
State Governments and local bodies.
b. The JNNURM guidelines should be amended to make adoption of such
procedures as a part of the mandatory reforms.
c. Similar simplification of procedures should be done in the issuance of
completion certificates by local bodies. In case of completed buildings, a
hundred per cent verification after the issue of completion certificates on
the basis of self-certification would be necessary within a specified period of
90 days. The Rules should provide heavy penalties, including demolition,
for violation of conditions as well as for negligence or collusion, if any, on
the part of the prescribed verifying authority.
d. The capacity building of the enforcement wings of the local bodies should
also be done alongside these initiatives to ensure compliance with local
bye-laws. The help of local residents' associations may be enlisted for this
purpose.

ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE OF GOVERNMENT
OF INDIA
1. (Para 4.2) Core Principles of Reforming the Structure of Government
a. The core principles mentioned in paragraph 4.1 should govern the
restructuring of Government of India.
2. (Para 5.1.11) Rationalising the Functions of Government
a. The Government of India should primarily focus on the core functions
stated in paragraph 5.1.10.
b. Government at all levels should be guided by the principle of
subsidiarity.
c. There is need to carry out a detailed analysis of the functions/activities in
each Ministry/Department in the light of (a) and (b) above. This should be
followed by restructuring which may include decentralization/delegation
or hiving off activities.
3. (Para 5.3.11) Rationalising and Reorganising the Ministries and Departments
a. The concept of a Ministry would have to be redefined. A Ministry would
mean a group of departments whose functions and subjects are closely
related and is assigned to a First or Coordinating Minister for the purpose
of providing overall leadership and coordination. This concept of a
Ministry and the Coordinating (or First) Minister may be explicitly laid
down in the Allocation of Business Rules. Adequate delegation among
the Ministers would have to be laid down in the Transaction of Business
Rules. As a consequence of this, rationalization of Secretary level posts
wherever required may also need to be carried out.
b. Individual departments or any combination of these could be headed
by the Coordinating (or First) Minister, other Cabinet Minister{s)/
Minister{s) of State.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
c. The structure of the Government of India should be rationalised by
grouping together closely related subjects as illustrated in paragraph
5.3.10.5 in order to reduce the number of Ministries to 20-25.
4. (Para 5.4.6) Recasting the Allocation of Business Rules
a. There is need to recast the Allocation of Business Rules to make them
more focussed on the goals and outcomes of each Ministry/Department
in order to shift the emphasis from a detailed listing of activities/subjects
of each Ministry/Department to a broader perspective.
b. The Allocation of Business Rules should first provide a Statement of the
mission of the department followed by a list of subjects and functions.
c. There is need to bring greater uniformity in the",description of the roles
and functions of various Ministries/Departments.
d. Ministries/Departments should maintain a master list of all laws
pertaining to the subjects dealt with in that Ministry/Department instead
of mentioning them in the Allocation of Business Rules. The underlying
principle should be stated in the Rules that all laws relating to the subjects
and functions allocated to a Ministry/Department would fall under its
purview.
e. Instead of naming the individual PSUs and autonomous organizations
under each Ministry, the Rules should merely have a generic entry to the
effect that all PSUs and Autonomous Organizations whose functioning
is direcdy related to subject(s) of the concerned Ministry would be
under its jurisdiction. However, in cases where activities of a PSU or an
autonomous organization relates to more than one Ministry/Department,
then it may be advisable to list out such PSUs under a particular Ministry/
Department.
5. (Para 5.5.2.7) Focus on Policy Analysis
a. In order to make them binding, the general principles to govern the extent
of delegation from Departments to their attached and subordinate offices
(executive agencies) may be incorporated in the Transaction of Business
Rules. These principles may stipulate that the Ministries/Departments
should concentrate on the following:
I
I

Organisational Structure of Government of India
i. Policy analysis, planning, policy making and strategic decisions
ii. Budgeting and Parliamentary work
iii. Monitoring of implementation through systems and procedures
iv. Appointments of key personnel
v. Coordination
vi. Evaluation
b. Attached and subordinate offices should serve as the executive agencies
of the ministries and concentrate on the implementation of Government
policies and programmes.
6. (Para 5.5.3.3) Policy Evaluation
a. Each Department should introduce a system of policy evaluation to be
carried out at the end of prescribed periods. All relevant policies should
be updated in the light of the findings of such evaluations.
7. (Para 5.6.10) Creation of Effective Executive Agencies
a. Each Union Government Ministry should scrutinize the functions/
activities of the ministry to confirm whether these activities/functions are
critical to the mission of the Department and can only be carried out by
government agencies. This should be done with reference to core areas
mentioned by the Commission in para 4.1.1.a.
b. Only those functions/activities that are in line with the principles
enunciated in paragraph 5.5.2.7 (a) should be carried out direcdy by the
Department/Ministries. Other functions/activities should be carried out
by the executive agencies of the department.
c. Each agency, whether a new body or an existing departmental undertaking/
agency/board/s pecial purpose body etc. that is to function as an executive
agency, must be autonomous or semi-autonomous and professionally
managed under a mandate. Such executive agencies could be structured
as a department, board, commission, company, society etc.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
d. The right balance between autonomy and accountability needs to be
struck while designing the institutional framework of executive agencies.
This could be achieved through well designed performance agreements,
Memorandum of Understanding (MOU), contracts etc. However,
preparing and enforcing such performance contracts requires considerable
upgradation of capacity in the concerned government departments.
8. (Para 5.9.7) Reorganisation of Ministries
a. Each Department should lay down a detailed scheme of delegation at
all levels so that the decision making takes place at the most appropriate
level. It should be laid down in the Manual of Office Procedure that
every Ministry should prescribe a detailed scheme of delegation for its
officers. This delegation should be arrived at on the basis of an analysis of
the activities and functions of the Ministry/Department and the type of
decisions that these entail which should be dovetailed with the decision
making units identified in that Department.
b. The scheme of delegation should be updated periodically and should
also be 'audited' at regular intervals. The audit should ensure that the
delegated authority is actually exercised by the delegatee. The scheme of
delegation should be placed in the public domain.
c. The number of levels through which a file passes for a decision should not
exceed three.
i. In cases where the Minister's approval is required, the file should be
initiated by the Deputy Secretary/Director concerned and should
be moved through the Joint Secretary (or Additional Secretary/
Special Secretary) and the Secretary (or Special Secretary) to the
Minister.
ii. Cases requiring approval of the Secretary should go through just two
levels (e.g. either US and Director, US and JS or Director and JS).
iii. Cases requiring approval of the JS/Director/DS should come
through just one level. The exact combination of levels should be
spelt out in the scheme of delegation for each Ministry/Department

Organisational Structure of Government of India
whereas the number ofl evels as suggested above should be prescribed
in the Manual of Office Procedure.
iv. The Department dealing with administrative reforms in the
Union Government should be entrusted with the task of ensuring
compliance with this stipulation.
d. For addressing cross cutting issues, the Secretary of the concerned
Department should have the flexibility to create inter-displinary teams.
e. The Manual of Office Procedure should be recast based on the principles
stated in paragraph 5.9.
f. The Departments should build an electronic database of decisions that
are likely to be used as precedents. Thereafter such database should be
periodically reviewed and where necessary, changes in rules introduced in
order to codify them. There may also be precedents that may be the result
of wrong or arbitrary decision making which the Department would
prefer not to rely on for the future. In such cases the Department would
have to appropriately change its policy/guidelines and if required even
the rules to ensure that these precedents are not wrongly used.
9. (Para 5.12) Coordination Mechanisms
a. There is need to ensure that the existing coordination mechanisms like
the Group of Ministers, and Committee of Secretaries function effectively
and help in early resolution of issues as stated in para 5.10 Selective, but
effective use of GOMs with dear mandate and prescribed time limits,
would be helpful.
b. Unresolved issues concerning States which require inter-Ministerial
coordination in Government of India, should be placed before the
Committee of Secretaries (COSs) and then to the Union Cabinet for
resolution.
10. (Para 6.4.8) Creating an Effective Regulatory Framework
a. Setting up of a Regulator should be preceded by a detailed review to decide
whether the policy regime in the concerned sector is such that a Regulator
I
II

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
would be better placed to deliver the policy objectives of the department
concerned.
b. In addition to the statutory framework which underpins the interface
between the government and the regulator, each Ministry/Department
should evolve a 'Management Statement' ourlining the objectives and roles
of eac:h regulator and the guidelines governing their interaction with the
government. This would guide both the government department and the
Regulator.
c. There is need for greater uniformity in the terms of appointment, tenure
and removal of various regulatory authorities considering these have been
set up with broadly similar objectives and functions and should enjoy the
same degree of autonomy. The initial process of appointment of Chairman
and Board l\lembers should be transparent, credible and fair.
d. The appointment of the Chairman and Board Members for all such
regulatory authorities should be done by the Union/State Governments
after an initial screening and recommendation of a panel of names by a
Selection Committee. The composition of the Selection Committee should
be defined in the respective Acts and may broadly follow the pattern laid
down in the Electricity Regulatory Commission Act.
e. The tenure of the Chairmen and Board Members could also be made
uniform preferably three years or 65 years of age whichever is earlier.
. f. Legal provisions regarding removal of Board Members should be made
uniform while at the same time ensuring sufficient safeguards against
arbitrary removal. This could be achieved by allowing removal by the
Union Government only on fulfilment of certain conditions as laid down
in Section 6 of the IRDA Act with the additional safeguard that a removal
for abuse of power shall be preceded by an enquiry and consultation with
UPSC.
g. Parliamentary oversight of regulators should be ensured through the
respe(:tive Departmentally Related Standing Parliamentary Committees.
h. A body of reputed outside experts should propose guidelines for periodic
evaluation of the independent Regulators. Based on these guidelines,
government in consultation with respective Departmentally related

Organisational Structure of Government of India
Standing Committee of the Parliament should fix the principles on which
the Regulators should be evaluated. The annual reports of the regulators
should include a report on their performance in the context of these
principles. This report should be referred to the respective Parliamentary
Committee for discussion.
i. Each statute creating a regulator should include a provision for an impact
assessment periodically by an external agency. Once the objective of creating
a level playing field is achieved, the intervention of the Regulators could
be reduced in a phased manner ultimately leading either to their abolition
or to convergence with other Regulators.
j. There is need to achieve greater uniformity in the structure of Regulators.
The existing coordination mechanisms such as the Committee ofS ecretariesI
Cabinet Committees, assisted by Secretary (Coordination) could easily
ensure that the institutional &amework for all Regulators follow, by and
large, a uniform pattern.
" I

STRENGTlIENING FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
SYSTEMS
1. (Para 4.5.8) Unrealistic Budget Estimates
a. The assumptions made while formulating estimates must be realistic. At
the end of each year the reasons for the gap between the 'estimates' and
'actuals' must be ascertained and efforts made to minimize them. These
assumptions should also be subject to audit.
b. The method of formulation of the annual budget by getting details
from different organizations/units/agencies and fitting them into a pre
determined aggregate amount leads to unrealistic budget estimates. This
method should be given up along with the method of budgeting on the basis
of 'analysis of trends'. This should be replaced by a 'top-down' method by
indicating aggregate limits to expenditure to each organization/agency.
c. Internal capacity for making realistic estimates needs to be developed.
2. (Para 4.6.5) Delay in Implementation of Projects
a. Projects and schemes should be included in the budget only after detailed
consideration. The norms for formulating the budget should be stricdy
adhered to in order to avoid making token provisions and spreading
resources thinly over a large number of projects/s chemes.
3. (Para 4.7.8) Skewed Expenditure Pattern - Rush of Expenditure towards the end
of the Financial Year
a. The Modified Cash Management System should be stricdy adhered.
This System should be extended to all Demands for Grants as soon as
possible.

Strengthening Financial Management Systems
4. (Para 4.8.26) Inadequate Adherance to the Multi-year Perspective and Missing Line
of Sight between Plan and Budget
a. A High Powered Committee may be constituted to examine and recommend
on the need and ways for having medium-term expenditure limits for
Ministries/Departments through the Five Year Plans and linking them to
annual budgets with carry forward facility.
b. In order to bring about clarity, transparency and consolidation, the
ways and means for implementing an 'alignment' project, similar to that
in the UK, may also be examined by the High Powered Committee so
constituted.
5. (Para 4.11.2) Adhoc Project Announcements
a. The practice of announcing projects and schemes on an ad-hoc basis in
budgets and on important National Days, and during visits of dignitaries
functionaries to States needs to be stopped. Projects/schemes which are
considered absolutely essential may be considered in the annual plans or
at the time of mid-term appraisal.
6. (Para 4.12.6) Emphasis on Meeting Budgetary Financial Targets rather than on
Outputs and Outcomes
a. Outcome budg~ting is a complex process and a number ofs teps are involved
before it can be attempted with any degree of usefulness. A beginning
may be made with proper preparation and training in case of the Flagship
Schemes and certain national priorities.
7. (Para 4.13.4) Irrational 'Plan - Non Plan' Distinction leads to Inefficiency in resource
Utilization
a. The Plan versus non-Plan distinction needs to be done away with.
8. (Para 5.2.12) Flow of Funds relating to Centrally Sponsored Schemes
a. The Controller General ofA ccounts, in consultation with the C&AG, should
lay down the principles for implementing the system of flow of sanctions/
approvals from the Union Ministries/Departments to implementing

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
agencies in the States to facilitate release of fund at the time of payment.
After taking into account the available technology and infrastructure
for ele4~tronic flow of information and funds, especially under the NeGp,
and putting in place a new Chart of Accounts, the scheme should be
implemented in a time bound manner.
9. (Para 5.3.6) Deyelopment of Financial Information System,
a. A robust financial information system, on the lines of SIAFI of Brazil,
needs to be created in the government in a time bound manner. This system
should also make accessible to the public, real time data on government
expenditure at all levels.
10. (Para 5.4.3) Capacity Building
a. The capacity of individuals and institutions in government needs to be
improved in order to implement reforms in financial management. To
facilitate this, a proper programme of training needs to be devised and
implemented in a time bound manner.
11. (Para 6.3) Accrual System of Accounting
a. A Task Force should be set up to examine the costs and benefits of
introducing the accrual system of accounting. This Task Force should
also examine its applicability in case of the Appropriation Accounts and
Finance Accounts.
b. Initially, a few departments/organizations may be identified where tangible
benefits could be shown to be derived within 2-3 years by implementing
the accrual system of accounting, especially departmental 'commercial
undertakings' .
c. The result of this initial implementation may be studied by a committee
of experts which would recommend on its further implementation in all
departments/o rganisations at the Union/State level along with exclusions,
if any~ This may proceed in a phased manner.
d. Prior to its implementation, training and capacity building needs of the
accounting personnel and all stake holders in the decision making process

Strengthening Financial Management Systems
would have to be addressed and a meticulous schedule worked out in line
with the road map of implementation.
e. Before the new system is adopted, alignment of the plan, budget and
accounts, as recommended in this Report elsewhere, needs to be achieved
and a viable financial information system needs to be put in place.
12. (Para 7.S) Internal Audit
a. An Office of the ChiefIntemal Auditor (CIA) should be established in select
Ministries!d epartments to carry out the functions related to internal audit.
Its independence, duties, functions, mechanism of coordination with the
CAG etc. should be provided by a statute.
b. CIAs should be direcdy responsible to the Secretary of the Department.
c. In the initial stages, personnel may be inducted from existing accounts
cadres. Norms for recruitment and utilizing private sector expertise in select
tasks may also be devised. Capacity building needs for proper functioning
of this Office should be identified in advance.
d. The modalities for ensuring non-duplication of work vis-a-vis the C&AG
should be formalized. This should be aimed at assisting the C&AG in
concentrating on carrying out specialized auditltasks.
e. Standards for internal audit should be prescribed by the Office of the
C&AG.
f. The Accounting functions should be completely separated from Internal
Audit.
g. The functioning and effectiveness of this new system may be examined
after allowing a suitable period of operation. Based on the results of this
examination, such offices may also be instituted in other Ministries!
departments!o rganisations.
h. An Audit Committee should be constituted in each Ministry!Department.
It should consist of a Chairperson and two members to be appointed by the
Minister in charge of that Ministry!Department. The Chairperson should
I
I

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
be a person of eminence in public life. The two members should be from
outside the government. The Audit Committee should look after matters
related to both internal and external audit including implementation oft heir
recomlnendations and report annually to the respective Departmentally
related Standing Committee of Parliament.
13. (Para 7.6.5) Integrated Financial Adviser
a. The role oft he Financial Adviser as the Chief Finance Officer of the Ministry
who is responsible and accountable to the Secretary of the Ministry/
Department should be recognized and the trend of dual accountability
should be done away with.
b. Officers with sufficient training and experience in modern financial
management systems should be posted as Financial Advisers in the
Ministries/Departments.
14. (Para 8.8.7) Accountability to Parliament
a. In order to further strengthen the Parliamentary oversight mechanism,
as many audit paras as possible need to be examined by Parliamentary
Committees. To facilitate this, the PAC and COPU may decide in the
beginning of the year itself, which paras would be examined by them and
which by their sub-committees (to be constituted for the purpose). They
may consider assigning other paras to the respective Departmentally related
Standing Committees. The objective would be to complete the examination
of all paras within one year. In exceptional cases, Chairman, PAC/COPU
may authorize keeping a para alive for more than one year. If still some
paras are pending, it is for the consideration of the PAC and COPU to
refer these to the Departmental Audit Committees (recommended vide
paragraph 7.5 of this Report).
15. (Para 8.9.7) Relationship between Audit and the Government/Government
Agencies
a. There is need for better understanding and synergy between the audit
and auditees for enhanced public accountability and consequently better
audit impact.
I u

Strengthening Financial Management Systems
b. There should be balanced reporting by the audit. Audit reports should
not focus on criticism alone but contain a fair assessment or evaluation,
which would mean that good performance is also acknowledged.
c. There is need for increasing interaction as well as coordination between
the executive and the audit, including at senior levels. These should
include regular and meaningful meetings where important issues could be
discussed and conclusions reached on what needs to be done arising out of
the recommendations made by the audit. There should also be quarterly
communication from the Accountant General to Administrative Secretaries
informing them about significant points and areas of improvement noted
by Audit during their inspections.
16. (Para 8.10.4) Timeliness of Audit
a. External audit needs to be more timely in inspecting and reporting so
that their reports can be used for timely corrective action. All audits for
the year under review should be completed by 30th of September of the
following year. To start with, all Audit Reports may be finalized by 31st
December and this date may be gradually advanced.
b. IT should be used increasingly and effectively for data collection and
analysis.
c. Government agencies also need to be more prompt in responding to
audit observations and ensure that the remedial and corrective action
not only settles the irregularities reported but also addresses the systemic
deficiencies.
17. (Para 8.11.5) Inadequate Response to Audit
a. The pending audit paras should be monitored by having a database
on them in each Ministry/Department. In case of persistent default in
submitting replies to the audit paras a procedure should be laid down for
a~tion against the concerned officer.

STATE AND DISTRICT ADMINISTRATION
1. (Para 2.3.2.12) Size of the Council of Ministers
a) The size of the Council of Ministers in the States needs to be reduced
further considering the needs of an efficient government. For this purpose
the maximum size of the Council of Ministers may be fixed in a range
between 10% to 15% of the strength of their Legislative Assemblies. In the
larger States (where membership of the Assembly is more than 200) such
maximum percentage should be 10% where as in the medium (where the
strength of the Assembly is between 80 and 200) and the smaller States
% %
(where the strength of the Assembly is below 80) it may be 12 and 15
respectively. This stipulation should however be subject to appropriate
proviso to remove anomalies. It may be ensured that the maximum number
of Ministers permissible for the medium sized States should not exceed
the number prescribed for a large sized State having 200 legislators and
similarly, the maximum number of Ministers permissible for the smaller
States should not exceed the number prescribed for a medium sized State
having 80 Legislators. There may not be any prescribed minimum.
b) There is need to arrive at a national consensus on this issue through
deliberations!d iscussions with the States at the Inter-State Council.
2. (Para 2.3.3.11) Rationalising the Number of Secretarial Departments
a) The number of Secretariat Departments in the States should be further
rationalized on the following basis:
i) The existing departments covering inter-related subjects, activities
and functions should be merged;
ii) Need for synergy between the activities of various departments;

State and District Administration
iii) Devolution of a large number of functions to the PRIs/ULBs;
iv) The role ofS ecretaries to be redefined; to be divested of non-essential
responsibilities and executive work and larger delegation of power
to the executive departments/agencies; and
v) Need for streamlining the decision making process.
3. (Para 2.3.5.5) Executive Agencies
a) The State Governments should scrutinize the functions/activities of each
department to confirm whether these activities/ functions are critical to
the mission of the department and can only be carried out by government
agencies.
b) Only those functions/ activities that have to be carried out by the government
based on the principle enunciated in paragraph 2.3.4.6 should be carried
out directly by the departments. Other functions/ activities should be
carried out by Executive Agencies of the department.
c) Each Executive Agency, whether a new body or an existing departmental
undertaking/ agency/ board/ special purpose body, etc. that is converted
into an Executive Agency, must be semi-autonomous and professionally
managed under a mandate. Such executive agencies could be structured as
a department, board, commission, company, society, etc.
d) There is need for a right balance between autonomy and accountability while
designing the institutional framework of executive agencies. This could be
achieved through well designed performance agreements, Memorandum of
Understanding (MoU), contracts, etc. However, preparing and enforcing
such performance contracts requires considerable upgradation of capacity
in the concerned governmental departments.
e) Agencies dealing with subjects where major functions and activities
have devolved on local governments would need to concentrate on -
monitoring and supervision, ensuring of standards and quality, providing
guidance to local governments on technical matters, training of personnel,
giving feedback to the government on implementation and performance
and advising on changes that are needed in plans and programmes - as
stated in paragraph 2.3.5.4.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
4. (Para 2.4.1.4) Civ:il Services Law
a) The Commission reiterates that the recommendations in its Tenth Report
pertaining to the Civil Services Law and Civil Services Authority should
be implemented by the State Governments both in letter and spirit.
b) In order to provide appropriate legislative backing to these reforms, each
State Government should enact a Civil Services Law for all the personnel
holding civil posts in the State (on the lines of the proposed Union Law).
However, in order to evolve a national consensus and ensure a measure of
uniformity among States, the matter may be taken up for deliberations at
the Inter-State Council.
5. (Para 2.4.2.6) Appointment and Security of Tenure at the Senior Levels in the State
Government
a) After enactment of the State Civil Services Law on the lines of the proposed
Union enactment, the proposed State Civil Service Authority should deal
with matters concerning appointment and tenure of senior officers of all
ranks in the State Governments (including the Chief Secretary, Principal
Secretaries, Engineer-in-Chiefs, other Agency Heads and Principal Chief
Conservator of Forests).
b) Till the time that such an Authority is constituted, the following mechanism
may be adopted for appointment of the Chief Secretary and Principal
Conservator of Forests in the States:-
• There should be a collegium to recommend a panel of names to the Chief
Minister/Cabinet for these two posts. For the post of ChiefS ecretary, this
collegium may consist of (a) a Minister nominated by the ChiefM inister,
(b) the Leader of the Opposition in the State Legislative Assembly
and (c) the incumbent Chief Secretary. For the selection to the post of
Principal Chief Conservator of Forests the collegiums may consist of
(a) The Minister In-charge of Forests, (b) the leader of Opposition in
the State Legislative Assembly and (c) the Chief Secretary.

State and District Administration
• There should be a fixed tenure of atleast two years for both these
posts.
• The selection for the post of Chief Secretary and Principal Chief
Conservator of Forests should b~ widened to include all officers above
a specified seniority (e.g. 30 years). All officers with a seniority higher
than a prescribed limit should be eligible to be a part of the panel.
c) As regards the appointment and tenure of the Director General of Police,
the recommendations made by the Commission in its Report on "Public
Order" at para 5.2.3.7 should be implemented.
6. (Para 2.4.3.9) Regional Level Administration
a) In view of the emergence of District as the key unit of field administration -
as the third tier of government -and with rapid advancement in physical and
electronic connectivity between the State Headquarters and the Districts,
there is no need to have an intermediate level of administration between
the two units of government.
b) In order to take care of cadre management issues arising out of this step,
suitable posts should be identified by respective departments, in the major
districts and at the Headquarters to be manned by senior officers who are
presently eligible to head the regional offices.
7. (Para 2.4.5.2) Vigilance CommssionNigilance Commissioner in the State
a) The recommendations made by the Commission in its Fourth Report (on
Ethics in Governance) and its Sixth Report (on Local Governance) for
action by State Governments should be implemented expeditiously.
b) The organization of the Vigilance Commission! Commissioner in the State
should be structured on the patterns of the Central Vigilance Commission.
In larger States, the State Vigilance Commission should be a three Member
Body with Members who have been experts in their respective fields. In
smaller States, it may continue to be a single Member Body.
c) The laws regarding the Lokayukta would need to be amended to incorporate
the changes suggested in the Report on 'Ethics in Governance'.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
8. (Para 2.4.6.16) Human Resource Development, Capacity Building and Training
a) The Commission reiterates its recommendations pertaining to capacity
building and training made in the Report on "Refurbishing of Personnel
Administration" (Tenth Report).
b) Every State should formulate a comprehensive Human Resource
Development Policy with training as an important component on the
lines of the National Training Policy, 1996. Simultaneously, a suitable
monitoring mechani.sm to supervise the implementation of such policy
may also be setup.
c) In addition to the apex level training body called the Administrative Training
Institute (ATI), adequate numbers of Regional Training Institutes should
also be established at different places across the State. The Apex Institute
should take care of the training needs of the Class I1Class II officers of the
State services, whereas the Regional Training Institutes should deal with
the mid-career training needs of Class II officers and induction training
of Class III employees. Steps should also be taken to set-up district level
training organizations which could take care of the mid-career training
needs of Class III employees. The district centre should also have proper
facilities for skill/behavioral training of Class IV recruits.
d) In this arrangement, the apex body, the ATI should have an overall
integrative and coordinating role for the entire training/orientation
programme running in the State. It should act as the primary resource
centre for Regional and District Training Institutes. It should also provide
training to those who will work on their faculty. In course of time, the ATI
can undertake projects of distance learning and become a virtual academy
of training for the entire State.
e) The State Administrative Training Institutes (ATIs) should have embedded
in them, Centers of Good Governance.
9. (Para 2.5.8) State Public Service Commissions
a) Steps should be taken to ensure that persons of high standing, intellectual
ability and reputation are selected as Chairman/Members oft he State Public
Service Commissions. A limit should also be imposed on the strength of
its membership.

State and District Administration
b) There is need to evolve national consensus among States on the issues of
(i) appointment of Chairman!Members and (ii) limit on the membership
of the Commission, through discussions! deliberations at the Inter-State
Council.
10. (Para 2.5.9.4) Functions of the Public Service Commission; its Relationship with
the Junior Recruiting Bodies
a) The Public Service Commission should handle only (i) recruitment of
candidates for higher level posts under the State Government (Class I
and Class II positions of various State cadres), (ii) advising government
on senior level promotions through the DPC and (iii) recruitment and
promotions to teaching posts in government Colleges and fully funded
units of the Universities.
b) With regard to the appointment of junior level functionaries of the State
Government, the role of the State Public Service Commission should be
to lay down broad norms and standards. The recruiting organisations
concerned such as the Subordinate Service Commission, the School
Teachers Selection CO.fJlmission and District Recruitment Boards should
follow these norms and standards in their working. The State Public Service
Commission would act as a watch dog.
11. (Para 3.2.4.15) Redefining the Collector's Role
a) There is need to realign the functions of the Deputy Commissioners!
District Collector so that he concentrates on the core functions such as
land and revenue Administration, maintenance of law and order, disaster
management, public distribution and civil supplies, excise, elections,
transport, census, protocol, general administration, treasury management
and Coordination with various agencies! departments.
b) The Commission reiterates its recommendations regarding the Land Tide
Management System made in its eleventh Report on e-Governance. It
should be one of the primary duties of the District Collector to perform
the task envisaged in the aforesaid recommendations.
c) There is need to strengthen the compliance machinery at the district level
to enforce provisions of the RTI Act and to reduce the element of delay
and subjectivity in the functioning of the lower level formations of the

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
government. This should be done by creating a special RTI Cell in the office
of the Collector, whose functions should be reviewed by the Collector at
regular periodicity.
d) Officers may be posted as District Magistrates early in their career, but in
complex and problem-prone districts an lAS officer should be posted as
DM only on completion of 10-12 years of service.
e) Steps should be taken to ensure that the Collector plays an effective
coordination role in activities and programmes of other departments at
the district level.
12. (Para 3.2.4.16.5) Modernising the Office of the District Collector
a) The Commission reiterates its recommendations on the issues of personnel
management, performance and outcome evaluation, effective citizen centric
administration, use of information technology, process re-engineering etc.
made in its earlier Reports on "Refurbishing of Personnel Administration",
"Ethics in Governance", "Citizen Centric Administration", "Public Order" ,
"Disaster Management", "Conflict Resolution" and "e-Governance". These
recommendations should be expeditiously implemented where applicable
to the district administration.
b) The following steps should be taken to modernize the office of the District
Collector:-
• Management Information System (MIS) should be set-up in the office
of the Collector for effective monitoring and evaluation of programmes/
projects under his direct control.
• A computerized District Grievance Cell should also be set up in the
Collectorate.
• An exclusive Vigilance Cell should be set up at the district level under
overall supervision of the District Collector. This Cell should also
maintain appropriate liaison with the office of the State Vigilance
Commission/ Commissioner.
• A forum should be established at the district level to interact with civil
society groups and media on important public issues.
·a

State and District Administration
• Immediate steps should be taken to introduce process re-engineering
and increased use of information technology. The steps suggested at
paragraph 3.2.4.16.3.4 in this regard may be initiated on priority.
c) Innovations and best practices initiated by officers should be documented
adequately and institutionalized through changes in rules/laws wherever
required.
13. (Para 3.3.1.14) District Administration; Functional and Structural Reforms
a) There should be an integrated governing structure at the district level in
the form of the "District Council" with representation from both urban
and rural areas. The Council will act as the "District Government".
b) The District Collector should have a dual role in this government structure.
He should work as the Chief Officer of the District Council and should be
fully accountable to the District Council on alilocai matters.
c) The District Officer would also be fully accountable to the State
Government on all regulatory/ other matters not delegated to the District
Government.
14. (Para 3.3.2.6) Line Departments of the State Government at the District/Sub
District Level
a) District/sub-district offices, whose activities/functions coincide with the
activities and functions transferred by the State Government to the PRIst
ULBs need not exist as separate entities at the district and sub-district levels.
Functions funds and functionaries of such offices should be transferred to
the appropriate local government institutions.
b) Line departments such as the Departments ofW ater Resources and PWD
(Roads) or the Department of Health engaged in execution of State-wide
projects need to maintain their separate offices at the district/s ub-district
level. On important issues, they will need to coordinate with the District
Collector. They will also need to coordinate with the District Council
to the extent their activities impinge on the powers and functions of the
Council.
. I

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
c) The line departments and their Agency Heads should provide technical
support and guidance to the District Councils in planning and monitoring
implementation.
15. (Para 4.2.6.16) Role of the Government of NCT in Municipal Affairs - its
Relationship with the Municipal Corporation of Delhi (MCD)
a) The Municipal Corporation of Delhi (MCD), including appointment of
the Commissioner and other functionaries should lie in the domain of the
Government of the National Capital Territory (GNCT). This can be done
by way of a notification under Section 490A of the Act, issued by the Union
Government. However, the appointment of the Commissioner should be
made by the GNCT in consultation with the Union Government.
b) In order that, the Union Government retains its overarching role over
ddivery of municipal services in the National Capital Territory, some
provisions of the existing Act should remain unchanged. For example,
Sections 487 to 490 of Chapter XXIV will need to be retained in their
present form. Provisions dealing with building regulations should be
kept intact in the domain of the Union Government (for example Section
347). Section 503(dealing with exemptions to the diplomatic missions)
and Section 508 (dealing with special provisions for the Red Fort area)
should also vest with the Union Government.
c) The Union Government may appoint an Expert Committee which
could work out the details of the required legal changes in a time bound
manner.
16. (Para 4.2.6.17.7) Empowerment of the Mayor
a) The Mayor of the M CD should be directly elected by popular mandate
through a city-wide election. The term should be for five years.
b) The functions of chairing the Corporation and exercising executive
authority should vest in the same functionary i.e. the Mayor. The Mayor
should be the Chief Executive Authority of the MCD.
c) The Mayor should appoint a 'Cabinet'; choosing the members from
amongst the elected corporators. The strength of this body should not
exceed 10 per cent of the number of the elected Corporators or fifteen,

State and District Administration
whichever is higher. The "Cabinet" should exercise executive authority
on matters entrusted to it by the Mayor, under his/her overall control and
direction.
17. (Para 4.2.6.18.12) Issue of Splitting up the MCD
(a) The municipal services in the entire National Capital Territory (NCT)
may be under the jurisdiction of a single municipal body viz. the current
Municipal Corporation of Delhi (MCD).
(b) In order to provide efficient, responsive and citizen friendly services to
the citizens, the MCD should be converted into a three tier institution
with the Corporation at the apex. The middle tier i.e. the Zones should be
adequately strengthened and empowered. The zonal body called Janpad
Parishad/Zonal Council will primarily be a representative body consisting
of elected Councillors (whose constituency falls majorly within the area
of the Zone) and some nominated members. These Janpad Parishads/
Zonal Councils should be given considerable financial and administrative
autonomy. Each Zone should have a separate fund and all'the taxes under
Sections 113(1) and (2) of the DMC Act should be collected and retained
by them. Their powers with regard to enforcement of regulations and bye
laws should also be enhanced appropriately. The third tier will consist of
Ward Sabhas.
(c) The MCD should be at the apex level of the new structure. It will act as
a kind of an Umbrella Organization - a Holding Entity, responsible for
giving overall policy direct.!ons and high level conceptual technical and
HRD support to the zones. This Apex body should not delve into the day
to-day functioning of the Zones. . It should provide coordination among
Zones & make laws/bye-laws for the whole of Delhi. It should take up
projects which run across multiple zones. It will be the duty of this apex
body to ensure that standards of development and civic amenities remain
uniform throughout the city.
(d) Substantial changes will need to be introduced in the provisions of the
existing DMC Act, 1957 to implement these recommendations. The Expert
Committee suggested earlier at paragraph 4.2.6.16(c) may be asked to carry
out this task within a period of two months.

Reports of the Administrive"R eforms Commission - A Summary
18. (Para 4.2.7.5) Distinction between Urban and Rural Areas in the NCT
a) There is no need to maintain the artificial distinction between urban and
rural areas in the National Capital Territory. The entire geographical area
falling into the NCT should be declared as "urban" under the meaning of
Section 2(61) of the DMC Act.
b) The Municipal Corporation should realise the taxes, levies and other
charges accordingly from the residents of these areas.
19. (Para 4.2.8.5) New Delhi Municipal Council
a) There is no need to change the present governing structure of the New
Delhi Municipal Council.
20. (Para 4.2.10.15) Role of the Government ofNCT in Spatial Planning and Land
Development; Its Relationship with the Delhi Development Authority
a) The composition of the D DA needs to be changed. The Chief Minister of
Delhi should be the Chairperson of this body in place of the Lt. Governor.
This should be done by amending Section 3(3) (a) of the DDA Act,
1957.
b) As stated in paragraph 4.2.10.12, other powers of the Union Government
as mentioned in various sections of the D DA Act should remain.
c) Steps should be taken urgently to improve the internal functioning of the
DDA on the lines recommended by the Ashok Pradhan Committee.
21. (Para 4.2.11.8) Role of the Government ofNCT - In Police, Law and Order
a) The Union Government may retain control over the broader aspects of
security and law and order whereas traffic, local policing and enforcement
of the special laws could be handed over to the Delhi Government. In the
long run some of these functions could be transferred to the Municipal
Corporation.
b) As this will involve major restructuring of the present Delhi Police
establishment, it may be advisable to constitute a Task Force with
representatives of both the Union and the Delhi Government to study the

State and District Administration
matter in depth and suggest appropriate restructuring through legislative
and administrative measures.
22. (Para 4.2.12.6) The Government of the NCT - Power to Raise Public Debt
a) The Government of the NCT needs to have access to greater funding;
beyond its own revenues or the grants given to it by the Union Government.
It should be allowed to have recourse to market borrowings. This could
be done by introducing an amendment to Article 293 by replacing the
word "State" with the words "State and UTs having a Legislature". Such
borrowings would be subject to limitations imposed by Article 293(3) and
293 (4) of the Constitution.
23. (Para 4.2.13.9) National Capital Region Planning Board
a) The NCR Planning Board should remain a planning, monitoring and
advisory body in charge of preparing the Master Plan for the NCR Region
consisting of both regional and sub-regional Plans. It should have adequate
financial resources at its disposal so that it could selectively prQvide financial
assistance to a few schemes of importance.
b) The composition of the 21 member NCR Planning Board should be
modified and only 6 Union Ministers and 3 Chief Ministers (Uttar Pradesh,
Haryana and Rajasthan) may be members of the Board.
c) There should be an Executive Committee under the chairmanship of
Secretary in-charge of Urban Development in Government of India with
Secretaries incharge of Commerce and Industry, Industrial Policy and
Promotion, Expenditure, Power, Secretary, Road Transport and Highways,
Chairman, Railway Board (all from the Government of India), Chief
Secretaries of the Governments of Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Haryana,
Principal Advisor (HUD), Planning Commission, and Vice Chairman,
Delhi Development Authority as members.
d) Since the Chief Ministers of the three States are members of the Board, the
decisions that are agreed to should be binding on the States concerned.
The NCR approved regional plans/sub-plans should mandatorily be part
of the Plans of State Governments. The NCR Planning Board Act should
be amended accordingly.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
24. (Para 4.3.7) Chandigarh
a) There is urgent need to revisit the Capital of Punjab (Development and
Regulation) Act and the Punjab New Capital (Periphery Control) Act,
1952 and examine if and how they are to be aligned with the changed
circumstances. This issue should to be examined urgently by the Ministry
of Home Affairs and the UT Administration.
b) The Metropolitan Planning Committee should be constituted without
further delay for comprehensive planning of the entire area covered under
the jurisdiction of the Union Territory of Chandigarh.
c) The entire territory under the jurisdiction of the Union Territory of
Chandigarh should be declared as urban area. However, in order to protect
the interest of present villages in the process of development, Wardl Area '
Sabhas should be constituted as recommended by the Commission in its
~eport on Local Governance. Also, till such time that the infrastructure in
these villages comes at par with the urban areas of Chandigarh, they may
be given necessary (local) tax relief.
d) The present Advisory Council to the Administrator should be substituted by
a more compact and cohesive body comprising inter-alia of the Member of
Parliament from Chandigarh, one MP each from Punjab and Haryana, the
Mayor of Chandigarh and the Advisor to the Administrator. Such a compact
body would be able to provide the necessary inputs to the Administrator
and also be able to meet more frequently.
e) The Union Government should suitably enhance the financial powers of
the UT administration by notifying the delegation proposed in the Table
4.12. Within such delegated powers, the UT Administration must be
given full administrative and functional autonomy. In addition, theUT of
Chandigarh should also have powers to create certain categories of posts
such as teachers, doctors and para-medical staff which are necessary for
delivering vital services used by the people of the region.
25. (Para 4.4.9) Puducherry
a) There should be enhanced financial and administrative delegation ofp owers
to the Government ofPuducherry. The Council of Ministers should be free
to discharge its functions effectively within such delegation.
/

State and District Administration
b) The delegation of powers should be made as suggested in Table No. 4.13
and revised once in five years.
c) Recommendations made by the Commission in its Report on "Local
Governance" (6th Report) may be implemented on priority in order to
strengthen and empower the PRIs in Puducherry.
d) The Puducherry Administration should be given the powers to raise public
debt in order to finance its development projects and plans.
26. (Para 4.5.7) Andaman and Nicobar Islands
a) The Union Government should constitute an Advisory Council to the
Administrator of Andaman & Nicobar Islands consisting of the local'
Member of Parliament, the Chief Secretary, Chairpersons of the Zila
Parishad and Municipal Concil and senior representatives from the
Ministries of Home Affairs, Tribal Affairs, Environment, Forests and
Defence and the Planning Commission to advise him on all important
matters of administration.
b) The Home Minister's Ad.visory Committee may be replaced by a Committee
under the Chairmanship of the Home Secretary with officers of suitable
seniority from the Ministries of Environment and Forests, Tribal Affairs,
Finance, Defence, Shipping and Planning Commission to examine and give
prima facie administrative approval to important proposals concerning
this Territory.
c) The IDA may be replaced by a multi-disciplinary task force under the
Chairmanship of the Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission. This body
should be responsible for laying down guidelines for preparing medium
and long term perspective plans for the overall development of the islands
and monitoring its implementations.
d) Recommendations made by the Commission in its Report on Local
Governance (Sixth Report) should be examined and implemented to the
extent they are relevant to strengthening and empowering local government
institutions in the Andaman & Nicobar Islands.
e) The Union Government should enhance financial the powers of the UT
administration by notifying delegation proposed in the Table No. 4.14.
II

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
This should be revised once in five years. Within such delegated powers,
the UT Administration must be given full administrative and functional
autonomy.
27. (Para 4.6.5) Lakshadweep
a) The Union Government should constitute an Advisory Council to
the Administrator of Lakshadweep consisting of the local Member of
Parliament, Chairman of the Zila Parishad and representatives of the
Ministries of Home Affairs, Tribal Affairs, Environment and Forests and
Defence and the Planning Commission to advise him on all important
matters of administration.
b) The Home Minister's Advisory Committee as existing today may be
replaced by a Committee under the Chairmanship of the Home Secretary
with officers of suitable seniority from the Ministries of Environment
and Forests, Tribal Affairs, Finance, Defence, Shipping and Planning
Commission to examine and give prima facie approval to important
proposals concerning this territory.
c) The multi-disciplinary task force under the Chairmanship of the Deputy
Chairman, Planning Commission, recommended to be set up for the
Andaman & Nicobar Islands in place of the Island Development Authority
should also include the Lakshadweep Islands. This Committee would be
responsible for laying down guidelines for preparing medium and long
term perspective plans for the over all development of the Islands and for
monitoring its implementation.
d) Recommendations made by the Commission in its Report on Local
Governance (Sixth Report) should be examined and implemented to the
extent they are relevant to strengthening and empowering local government
institutions in Lakshadweep Islands.
e) The Union Government should enhance the financial powers of the UT
administration by notifying the delegation proposed in the Table No. 4.15.
This could be reviewed once in five years. Within such delegated powers,
the UT Administration should be given full administrative and functional
autonomy.

State and District Administration
28. (Para 4.7.6) Daman and Diu and Dadra & Nagar Haveli
a) The recommendations made by the Commission in its Report on 'Local
Governance' should be implemented on priority by the Union Government
in Daman & Diu and Dadra & Nagar Haveli.
b) The Union Government should immediately enhance financial powers of
the UT administration by notifying delegation proposed at Table No. 4.16.
This should be revised once in five years. Within such delegated powers,
the UT Administration must be given full administrative and functional
autonomy.
c) The Union Government should review the requirement of personnel at
different levels in both the UTs. The operating levels should be adequately
manned. At the same time, the Government should examine the issue of
having so many senior level posts in Daman & Diu, which has resulted in
a top-heavy administration.
29. (Para 5.3.6) North Eastern Region: Ethnic Conflicts - in Places, Manifesting as
Territorial Conflicts and Violence (Problem of Insurgency and Law and Order)
a) In order to address the genuine and legitimate concerns of the local people,
there is need to continue political dialogue among various stakeholders.
Steps should be taken to upgrade the capacity and capability of the police
forces of the States so that they are able to uphold the law. In order to
control cross border movement ofi nsurgents, in addition to other measures,
diplomatic efforts should be stepped up.
b) The North-East Division of the Ministry of Home Affairs should be
upgraded to a separate wing and put under the charge of an Additional/
Special Secretary to handle the increased and complex workload pertaining
to the region.
c) To oversee the formulation and implementation of the plans for this region,
a Standing Committee of the National Development Council should be
constituted and may be headed by a Cabinet Minister. The Committee
should report to the Chairman, NDC twice a year to ensure both speedy
resolution of any differences and coordinated action regarding development
of the region.

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
30. (Para 5.4.8) Provisions of the Sixth Schedule of Constitutions with Respect to
Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram
a) The Government may undertake an exercise to incorporate provisions
which currendy occur as footnotes, in the main text of the Sixth Schedule.
This will make the Schedule more accessible to members of the public.
31. (Para 5.5.5) Adhoc Transfer of Subjects!A ctivities to Autonomous Councils
a) The power of the Councils to make laws, as permitted by the Schedule,
should be respected in its true spirit and draft legislations should not
be stalled at the State level for years, while ensuring that they are not
inconsistent with the provisions of the Constitution and relevant Union
and State Laws.
b) The States should undertake comprehensive activity mapping with regard
to all the subjects mentioned in Para 3, 3A and 3B of the Sixth Schedule.
This mapping should cover all aspects of the subjects viz planning,
budgeting and provisioning of finances. This will necessitate full transfer
of all government offices and institutions dealing with these activities to
the control of the Councils. The State Government should set-up a Task
Force to complete this work in a time span of one year.
c) The Union Government should also take "imilar action with regard to
Centrally Sponsored Schemes being implemented in these areas.
32. (Para 5.6.6) Predominance of non-elected Customary Heads!Bodies at the Village
Level; Issue ofV illage Self Governance in the Sixth Schedule Areas
a) Autonomous Councils should be encouraged to pass suitable legislation
for establishment of elected bodies at the village level with well defined
powers and a transparent system of allocation of resources.
b) Suitable stipulations may be made in the procedure for release of grants
to the Councils that a certain portion thereof will be disbursed only in
the event of a Council passing and implementing the legislation referred
at (a) above.
c) While an Autonomous District Council should be free to lay down a
suitable framework for Village Councils under its jurisdiction, this freedom

State and District Administration
-
should be subject to certain general principles such as, the number of
ex officio members/ traditional village functionaries should not be in a
majority and the Village Council should be responsible for implementation
of development schemes at the village level (including planning, monitoring
and selection of beneficiaries) .
33. (Para 5.7.3) Absence of Linkage between the Sixth Schedule and the 73rd
Amendment
a) Autonomous Districts/Councils in Sixth Schedule Areas should also
be covered by the State Finance Commission and the State Election
Commission.
34. (Para 5.8.6) Special Powers of the Governors of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and
Mizoram with respect to Schedule 6 Areas
a) The Governors of Assam, Tripura and Mizoram should be empowered to
exercise discretionary powers in respect of all the provisions pertaining to
the Autonomous Councils under the Sixth Schedule in consultation with the
Council of Ministers and if necessary, in consultation with these Councils.
A Constitutional amendment will be required for this purpose.
b) Paragraph 14 of the Sixth Schedule should be suitably amended to enable
the Union Government to appoint a common Commission to review
the working of all autonomous districts of the North-East and to make
recommendations as envisaged therein. A periodicity may also be provided
for the Commission.
c) A high-level Review Committee headed by the Governor and consisting
of representatives of both the State Government and the District Copncils
should be formed in each State to review the functioning of these bodies.
This Committee should submit its report to the Union Government.
35. (Para 5.11.5) Issue of Tribal Areas Lying outside the Sixth Schedule
a) For tribal areas which lie outside the Sixth Schedule as well as the Seventy
Third .Constitutional Amendment the State Government should t~e steps
to create specially at the district level bodies which should consist of both
elected as well as traditionally selected representatives. The States which
show initiative and take a lead in this matter should be given incentives . •

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
b) The District Rural Development Authority of the district should work as
a body accountable to this District Level Body.
36. (Para 5.12.6) Personnel Management and Capacity Building of Administration
a) The North Eastern Council, in consultation with the Universities and other
educational institutions of the region, should draw up programmes for
coaching students for the Civil Services, and other competitive tests such
as the Combined Defence Services Examination and, the Engineering!
Medical Examinations.
37. (Para 5.13.2) Issues of Recruitment in the Sixth Schedule Areas
a) Immediate steps should be taken to constitute District cadres for all Groups
'C' and 'D' posts (Classes III and IV) for performance of all 'transferred
functions' wherever such action has not been taken.
b) Recruitment to Groups 'N. and 'B' posts (Classes I and II) by the Autonomous
District Councils or analogous bodies particularly to positions requiring
technical/professional qualifications should ordinarily be left to the State
level.
c) State Governments and the Autonomous District Councils should joindy
draw up norms for arriving at the number of technical and professional
posts required in the tribal areas. Personnel for such posts should be made
available on priority basis.
d) Postings to the tribal areas should be for a fixed tenure and must be followed
by, as far as practicable, to a posting at a place of the officer's choice.
e) On satisfactory completion of tenure in such areas the incumbent should
be entided to benefits like deputation for higher professional qualifications,
training abroad and higher weightage in Departmental promotions.
38. (Para 5.14.4) Regional Institutes
a) For improving delivery systems and development processes, emphasis ought
to be given to capacity building of personnel and it should be a priority
activity of the government.

State and District Administration
b) There should be comprehensive training programmes for all government
employees working in the North-Eastern States. The programmes should
consist of (i) a long duration induction module when he joins service, (ii)
mid career training opportunities and (iii) officials should be encouraged
to acquire higher professional qualifications/skill sets in their respective
branches and also in subjects such as Public Administration, Trade laws,
project investment/ appraisal/ management and information technology
applications.
c) The North Eastern Council (NEC) should establish an apex Regional
Academy for Human Resource Development as an autonomous body with
academic and executive flexibility. The mandate of the A~ademy may extend
to the entire range of services under the government.
d) The North-Eastern Council should be given the responsibility to undertake
a review of various regional institutes under the Union Government/
Ministries and come up with suitable recommendations for bringing
improvements in their functioning whenever required. An officer/member of
the NEC should be placed on the governing body of these institutions.
e) The NEC should take up monitoring and evaluation of these Institutes. The
Commission in its Seventh Report has already recommended that the NEC
should be suitably strengthened. Once this is done, it should be possible for
the NEC to undertake these additional and important responsibilities.
f) The North Eastern Hill University (NEHU) could provide the academic
foundation for policy research on issues impinging on the entire region
and which need to be addressed by State action.
39. (Para 5.15.1.5) Assam
a) All the three Sixth Schedule Autonomous Councils of Assam should be
given parity with regard to legislative and executive powers.
b) Adequate resources should be provided to the Autonomous Councils so
th.at they are able to carry out their assigned responsibilities effectively. The
allocation of funds to these bodies should be based on pre-settled norms
(with reference to the minimum standards of service to be provided and
their capacity to raise local resources). This exercise could be undertaken
by the State Finance Commission.
II
I
I

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
c) The system of release of funds to the BTC through a single window system
should be further fine tuned to make it more effective and hassle free. Such
a hassle free system of fund release should be adopted for the other two
Councils also with adequate delegation of financial powers.
40. (Para 5.15.1.6.8) Tribe Specific Councils (Created under State Enactment) in
Assam
a) The Government of Assam should apportion functions between the tribe
specific CouncilsNillage Councils and the Panchayati Raj Institutions in
a manner that schemes involving individual tribal beneficiaries may be
assigned to the 'Tribe Specific Councils' while area development schemes
are assigned to the latter.
b) The State Government should initiate a system of meeting at least the
establishment costs of the 'Tribe Specific Councils' from sources outside
the tribal sub plan and build in these requirements in their projections to
the next Finance Commission.
c) The State Government should take steps to identify innovative initiatives
which could be entrusted to the Tribe Specific Councils for the benefit oft he
concer~ed tribes without affecting area development and local government
concerns.
d) Suitable guidelines may be drafted for preparation of District and sub
District plans in the relevant areas through joint efforts of the Tribe Specific
Councils and the Panchayati Raj Institutions.
41. (Para 5.15.2.5.5) Arunachal Pradesh
a) The recommendations made in its Report on "Local Governance"
for strengthening and empowering PRIs need to be implemented on
priority.
b) Some districts of Arunachal Pradesh are presently affected by insurgency
from neighboring States. Firm steps should be taken by both the Union
and the State Government to restore peace in the affected areas.
c) Traditionally, land in Arunachal Pradesh is owned by the community.
However, this system has gradually weakened primarily because community
II
I

State and District Administration
owned land is not a bankable collateral. This issue needs to be resolved in
consultation with the Reserve Bank of India, banks and stake-holders in
the land.
d) Because of the gradual expansion of the formal judicial system in place of
the traditional 'Kebang system', it would be necessary for the Ministry of
Home Affairs to examine the Assam Frontier (Administration of Justice)
Regulation Act 1945 in the State, to ensure a smooth transition to the
formal judicial system.
42. (Para 5.15.3.7) Manipur
a) Sincere, proactive measures should be taken to revive and activate the Hill
District Councils in Manipur. It will be imperative to devolve a major
domain of developmental activities to them. It will have to be done along
with transfer of funds and functionaries. The local functionaries of the
field offices/departments of the State Governments and the parallel bodies
which are currendy handing these activities at the district level will also
need to be placed at the disposal of the District Councils.
b) All steps should be taken to put in place elected Village Councils in rural
areas. Suitable incentives should be provided to the State for initiating
proactive legislative measures in this direction having due regard to the
local circumstances.
c) As regards the PRIs the Commission has already made a number of
recommendations for their strengthening and empowerment in its Report
on "Local Governance" (sixth Report) which needs to be implemented on
priority.
43. (Para 5.15.3.8.5) Issues of Personnel Management in Manipur
a) Initiatives of the Manipur Government in human resource management
need to be sustained. Similar initiatives may also be considered by other
States of the region.
44. (Para 5.15.3.9.3) Special Powers to the Governor ofManipur under Article 371
a) In view of the circumstances prevailing in Manipur, the Governor of
Manipur should be given special powers/responsibility with respect to law

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
and order on the lines of the powers vested in the Governors of Nagaland
and Arunachal Pradesh under Articles 371Aand 371H of the Constitution
respectively. This could be done by inserting a suitable paragraph in Article
371C.
45. (Para 5.15.4.7) Meghalaya
a) The fact ofA utonomous District Councils should be accepted and the State
should undertake comprehensive activity mapping with regard to all the
matters mentioned in para 3 of the Sixth Schedule. This process should
cover all aspects of the subjects viz planning, budgeting and provisioning
of finances. This will necessitate full transfer of local functionaries of the
field offices/departments and bodies relating to these activities at the district
level to the control of the Councils. The State Government should set-up
a task force to complete this work in a time bound manner.
h) Allocation of funds to the District Councils should be based on normative
and transparent considerations. These allocations should be budgeted in
detail and released in agreed instalments during the financial year.
c) The Union Government would also need to take similar action with regard
to Centrally Sponsored Schemes being implemented in these areas.
d) Appropriate measures may be taken for capacity building in Autonomous
Councils so that they are able to utilize the funds in a better way.
e) Government of Meghalaya may take steps for extension of the experiment
of elected village committees in the Garo Hills for implementing the
National Employment Guarantee Act and for implementation of other
rural development programmes as well.
f) In the long run, direcdy elected village level representative bodies will need
to be constituted and adequately empowered in autonomous Hill Councils
areas of Meghalaya.
46. (Para 5.15.5.5) Mizoram
a) The State should undertake comprehensive activity mapping with regard
to all the matters mentioned in para 3 of the Sixth Schedule. This process
should cover all aspects of the subjects viz planning, budgeting and

State and District Administration
provisioning of finances. This will necessitate full transfer of functionaries
of the field offices/departments/bodies relating to these activities to the
control of the Councils. The State Government should set-up a Task Force
to complete this work in a time bound manner.
b) The Union Government will also need to take similar action with regard
to Centrally Sponsored Schemes being implemented in these areas.
47. (Para 5.15.6.9) Nagaland
a) The Commission would like to reiterate the following recommendation in
this regard made in its Seventh Report:-
Nagaland has made commendable efforts to usher in a paradigm of
decentralised village self-governance through effective use of "Social
Capital". The State has communitised a large number ofs ervice delivery
schemes. The Ministry of Rural Development should formally recognise
this arrangement for implementation ofv arious development and poverty
alleviation initiatives in this State.
Its replication by other States should be pursued.
48. (Para 5.15.7.6) Sikkim
a) The Commission has made a number ofr ecommendations for strengthening
and empowering PRIs in its Report on "Local Governance" which needs
to be implemented on priority.
b) There is need to rationalize the large cadre strength of various All India
Services in the State, in accordance with actual requirements.
49. (Para 5.15.8.8) Tripura
a) D PCs may be constituted in all the districts ofTripura with representation
from both the TTADC and the District Administration as all the districts
in Tripura comprise of both TTADC and part IX areas. The TTADC should
also be involved in the planning process at the State level.
b) Immediate steps should be taken to ensure that there is only one intermediate
structure between the village and the district bodies of the TTAADC.
II

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
c) The State Government should take steps to evolve a mechanism which
could coordinate block level committees chaired by MLAs and zones and
sub-zones which are headed by elected representatives ofTTAADC.
d) The State may also undertake comprehensive activity mapping exercise to
delineate functions among various levels operating within the system such
as the District Council, the Block committee and the Village Council.
50. (Para 6.5.1.3) Financial Delegation and Operational Flexibility - the IFA system
a) Based on the experience of the Union Government with regard to the IFA,
States should take steps to introduce I strengthen the IFA system in the
State administration.
51. (Para 6.5.2.3) Avoiding Fiscal Profligacy
a) The State Governments need to take steps to ensure that projects and
programmes are included in the budget only after well considered
deliberations and processes. The practice of announcing projects and
schemes on an ad-hoc basis needs to be done away with.
52. (Para 6.5.3.3) Expenditure Management
(a) The States should take priority steps to improve their expenditure profile by
(a) finalizing the detailed project reports of schemes in the preceding year
and (b) ensuring that the financial sanctions are given to the departments
in the first two months of the current financial year.
(b) The States should conduct a zero-base review of programmes and schemes
which are more than five years old and which involve large sums of public
money. (Say over 50 crores)
53. (Para 6.5.4.7) Prudent Budget formulation
a) There should be prudent and realistic economic assumptions in formulation
of budget estimates. At the end of every financial year, the gap between
the estimates and the actuals should be analysed so that the underlying
economic as~umptions could be suitably calibrated for the future.
b) There should be interaction between the State Government and stakeholders
including industry associations, think tanks etc. in budget formulation. In
1.11

State and District Administration
order to make such consultations effective and meaningful, steps should be
taken to (a) provide information-access to citizens and (b) educate citizens
and leaders of society on budget making and its implications.
c) State Governments should shift to multi-year budgeting and give the
estimates of revenue and expenditure for a period of four years in addition
to the year which the budget pertains. This should be done on a roll-on
basis.
d) The States should follow the practice of preparation and implementation
oftheMTFP.
e) In order to remove prejudice against non-plan expenditure, the State should
take steps to provide for maintenance of the asset in the project cost itself
and ensure its maintenance for at least five years after it is acquired~. 'This
action should go hand in hand with recovery of adequate user charges.
54. (Para 6.5.5.2) Revenue Forecast and Need for a Tax Research Unit
a) The State Governments should initiate steps to set up dedicated cell within
its Finance Department to provide input on the revenue forecast with the
reasons thereof.
55. (Para 6.5.6.2) Mechcwism for Internal Control
a) The State Governments should take steps to set up internal audit committees
in each of its departments.
56. (Para 6.5.7.3) External Audit
a) The State Governments should specify a time frame for the Departments
for necessary follow up action on the recommendations of Audit and
forwarding of the ATN after incorporating such action to Audit for vetting
before their final submission to the State PAC! COPU. All Departments
should adhere to the prescribed time limits.
57. (Para 6.5.8.3) Projectisation and Appraisal
a) In order to deploy public funds prudentially, with inbuilt financial closure,
the States should take steps to strengthen their project formulation and
appraisal capacity.
II

Reports of the Administrive Reforms Commission - A Summary
ist of Reports Submitted by the
Second Administrative Reforms Commission up to April 2009
I. First Report: Right to Information: Master Key to Good Governance
2. Second Report: Unlocking Human Capital: Entitlements and Governance -
A Case Study
3. Third Report: Crisis Management: From Despair to Hope
4. Fourth Report: Ethics in Governance
5. Fifth Report: Public Order - Justice for each . .. Peace for all
6. Sixth Report: Local Governance - An Inspiring Journey into the Future
7. Seventh Report: Capacity Buildingfor Conflict Resolution - Friction to Fusion
~ 8. Eighth Report: Combatting Terrorism - Protecting by Righteousness
9. Ninth Report: Social Capital-A Shared Destiny
10. Tenth Report: Refurbishing ofP ersonnel Administration - Scaling New Heights
II. Eleventh Report: Promoting e-Governance - The SMART ~y Forward
12. Twelfth Report: Citizen Centric Administration - The Heart of Governance
13. Thirteenth Report: Organisational Structure of Government ofI ndia
14. Fourteenth Report: Strengthening Financial Management Systems
15. Fifteenth Report: State and District Administration