No. N] - I 40 I /2/202 I
(lovernmcnt
o[ India
'lirurism
Ministry of
(Niche'I'ourism Division)
1* Floor, Transport Bhawan,
1, Parliament Street,
New Delhi-l10001.
Dated: 29th April2022
OFF'ICE MEMORANDUM
Subject: National Strategy for Adventure Tourism
Thc Ministry of ['ourism has f.rmulatr-.cl a National Strategy for Adventure
Tourism. A copy oI the strategv is encr.st:d for rcady rc.fcrcnce anJiurther action, as
.
appropria
tt,
\
2.
Ihis issucs with the appror,,rl ot (.ornp1,11,p1 Authoritr..
i
^r\
(Sanjay Singh)
.l.o Deputy Director General
Sccrctaric.s oI all Ministrics/ [)t:pa rtmr:tr ts, (]ovcrnmcr.rt of Ir-rclia
Copy for information and nccr:ssary action along with a copv of thc. stratcgy clocument
to:-
I'rincipal
st-'crcta rics/ strrcta rics/ Commissi.ncr (l ourisrn), all statc
(lovernmcnts/
U'l' Adrninistratior.rs
Copy for inlormation and nccc.ssarv action along with a copy of the strategy documcnt
to:-
IMF/ UNhP(lnr,lia) / FICCT / CII / R'tSOr / r:At'tlr / tL:rO / ADTOT/ TAAr
/ A rAOr
contd....

,)
Copy for information to:-
1. rrs to HM(T) / 15 to MoS (SYN) / 15 to.MoS (AB)
2.
I']S to Secretary (T)
3. 15 to DG (D / r'S to AS (T) /
4. I'S to ADG (! / 15 to EA (T) / PS to ADG (MR)
5. 'l'ourism
All I{egional Directors, Ministry of
(Sanjay Singh)
Deputy Director General

INTRODUCTION | 1
Ministry of Tourism
Government of India
NATIONAL
STRATEGY FOR
ADVENTURE
TOURISM
APRIL 2022
Double Hump Camel ride
in Nubra Valley, Ladakh

2 | NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR ADVENTURE TOURISM

NATIONAL
STRATEGY FOR
ADVENTURE
TOURISM
APRIL 2022
Ministry of Tourism
Government of India

4 | NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR ADVENTURE TOURISM
CONTENTS
Chapter 1 – Introduction 1
1.1. India’s Unrivalled Natural Attractions 2
1.2. Adventure Tourism – India’s Significant Geographical Advantage 2
1.3. India’s Potential For Adventure Tourism 2
1.4. Adventure Tourism – A Niche Tourism Segment 3
1.5. Adventure Tourism – Promotes Core Values of Sustainable Tourism 3
1.6. National Strategy On Sustainable Tourism 3
1.7. National Strategy On Rural Tourism 3
1.8. National Strategy For Adventure Tourism 3
Chapter 2 – Vision, Mission And Strategy 5
2.1. Adventure Tourism 6
2.2. Vision 6
2.3. Mission 6
2.4. Strategic Pillars 7
2.5. Stakeholders 7
Chapter 3 – State Assessment, Ranking & Strategy 11
3.1. Ranking of the States on Adventure Tourism 12
3.2. Improving India’s World Ranking In Adventure Tourism 12
3.3. Need For A Comprehensive State Strategy for Adventure Tourism 13
3.4. Guiding Principles For Adventure Tourism 13
3.5. Assistance To The States For Preparing Strategy 13
Chapter 4 – Skills, Capacity Building And Certification 15
4.1. Skill Development Of Adventure Activity Service Providers 16
4.2. Skill Training And Capacity Building Of Local Communities 16
4.3. Training And Certification Of Guides 16
4.4. National And State Resource Centres 17
4.5. Certification For Adventure Activity Service Providers 17
Chapter 5 – Marketing And Promotion 19
5.1. Creating A Sub-brand 20
5.2. Dedicated Promotional Campaign 20
5.3. State Specific Campaigns 20
5.4. Destination Specific Campaigns 20
5.5. Campaign For Responsible Travellers 21
River Rafting, Rishikesh

INTRODUCTION | 5
Chapter 6 – National Adventure Tourism Safety Management Framework 23
6.1. Need For Adventure Tourism Safety 24
6.2. Current Efforts For Adventure Tourism Safety 24
6.3. National Adventure Tourism Safety Management Framework 25
6.4. Key Objectives Of Safety Framework 25
6.5. Guiding Principles For Safety Framework 25
6.6. Strategic Elements Of Safety Framework 25
Chapter 7 – National/ State Level Rescue and Communication Grid 27
7.1. Immediate Evacuation and Rescue To Save Casualty 28
7.2. National and State Rescue and Communication Grid 28
7.3. Functions of Rescue and Communication Grid 28
7.4. Composition of Rescue and Communication Grid 29
Chapter 8 – Destination and Product Development 31
8.1. Identification of Destinations, Profiling and Prioritization 32
8.2. Development of Prioritized Destinations 32
8.3. Implementation of Development Plans 32
8.4. Private Sector Partnership In Adventure Tourism 33
8.5. Homestays and Community Lodges 33
Chapter 9 – Governance and Institutional Framework 35
9.1. Action Plan 36
9.2. Governance 36
9.3. National Nodal Agency 37
9.4. State Nodal Agency 39

1
6 | NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR ADVENTURE TOURISM
CHAPTER
Skiing in Gulmarg

INTRODUCTION | 01
INTRODUCTION

02 | NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR ADVENTURE TOURISM
INTRODUCTION
1.1. India’s unrivalled natural attractions
The natural attractions in India are almost unrivalled in the world, ranging from pristine forests,
the snow-clad Himalayas, montane grasslands, golden and silver deserts, rivers, lakes,
wetlands, mangroves, beaches, volcanoes and corals, housing tremendous biodiversity.
Besides, we have the mega-fauna consisting of iconic species such as tigers, lions, elephants,
rhinos, leopards, wild buffaloes, Indian bison (gaur), etc. and more than 1200 species of birds.
1.2. Adventure Tourism – India’s significant geographical advantage
India has a significant geographical advantage owing to its rich natural & eco-tourism
resources:
• 70 percent of the Himalayas
• 7,000 Km of coastline
• Among one of the three countries in the world with both hot and cold deserts
• Ranks 10th in total area under forest cover
• Ranks 6th in terms of number of recognized UNESCO Natural Heritage sites
1.3. India’s potential for Adventure Tourism
Despite the natural wealth and potential, India ranks quite low in global adventure tourism.
India holds great potential to become a global marketplace for adventure activities and sports.
India has tremendous potential to attract adventure tourists from different parts of the World.
From North to South and East to West, the geographical conditions of the country provide a
competitive edge regarding the development of adventure tourism opportunities.

INTRODUCTION | 03
1.4. Adventure Tourism – A niche tourism segment
Adventure tourism is a type of niche tourism where exploration or travel involves some
degree of risk (real or perceived) and may require special skills, and physical effort. Adventure
tourism can be any tourism activity that includes physical activity, cultural exchange, and
connection with nature. Adventure tourism experiences are generally divided into two types
hard adventure and soft adventure.
1.5. Adventure Tourism – promotes core values of sustainable tourism
Adventure tourism incorporates and promotes the core values of sustainable tourism.
It attracts visitors outside of peak season, highlights the natural and cultural values of a
destination, thereby promoting its preservation, and creates resilient and committed travellers.
Adventure tourism is resilient, attracts high-value customers and supports local economies.
Adventure tourism practitioners encourage sustainable tourism because without pristine
natural environment and meaningful cultural experiences, adventure tourism cannot exist.
1.6. National Strategy on Sustainable Tourism
The Ministry of Tourism has also drafted a national strategy on Sustainable tourism which
focuses on promoting environmental sustainability, protecting biodiversity, promoting
economic sustainability and promoting socio-cultural sustainability. The strategy aims to
mainstream sustainability into the tourism sector. Adventure tourism is one of the important
segments to promote sustainable tourism.
1.7. National Strategy on Rural Tourism
The Ministry of Tourism has recently notified the national strategy on rural tourism. Keeping
in view that adventure tourism activities are largely away from the cities, the strategy for rural
tourism is also relevant for the promotion of adventure tourism in the country.
1.8. National Strategy for Adventure Tourism
1.8.1. Adventure Tourism has grown exponentially worldwide over the past years with tourists visiting
destinations previously undiscovered. This allows for new destinations to market themselves
as truly unique, appealing to those travellers looking for rare, incomparable experiences.
1.8.2. In order to provide impetus to the development of adventure tourism in the Country, National
Strategy for adventure tourism has been prepared. The Strategy focuses on developing
adventure destinations, promoting safety in adventure tourism, skill development, capacity
building and marketing.

04 | NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR ADVENTURE TOURISM
Gangtok, Paragliding

2
VISION, MISSION AND STRATEGY | 05
CHAPTER
VISION, MISSION
AND STRATEGY

06 | NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR ADVENTURE TOURISM
VISION, MISSION
AND STRATEGY
2.1. Adventure Tourism
2.1.1. Definition
Adventure tourism is a trip that includes at least two of the following three elements physical
activity, natural environment and cultural immersion.
2.1.2. Hard adventure activities
Adventure tourism activities that involve a high level of risk and require a greater level of
expertise, skills, training and experience. Tourists taking hard adventure activities, need to
have the knowledge of hard adventure activity, a high level of expertise, physical & mental
fitness, and expert guidance. High altitude mountaineering, river rafting, scuba diving, hang
gliding, skydiving comes etc. are hard adventure activities.
2.1.3. Soft adventure activities
Adventure tourism activities involve moderate levels of risk and the tourists involved in these
activities do not require particular skills or experience. Most tourists take soft adventure
activities for recreation and fun as it involves a lesser level of risk. Hiking, camping, biking
come under soft adventure activities.
2.2. Vision
To position India as a preferred destination for adventure tourism globally.
2.3. Mission
To develop an enabling ecosystem for the growth of Adventure Tourism in the Country and
create synergies amongst Central Government, State Governments, Private Sector and local
communities, for the development of Adventure Tourism.

VISION, MISSION AND STRATEGY | 07
2.4. Strategic Pillars
Following strategic pillars have been identified for development of sustainable tourism,
adventure tourism and ecotourism:
(i). State assessment, ranking and strategy
(ii). Skills, capacity building and certification
(iii). Marketing and promotion
(iv). Strengthening adventure tourism safety management framework
(v). National and State-level rescue and communication grid
(vi). Destination and Product Development
(vii). Governance and Institutional Framework
2.5. Stakeholders
2.5.1. Key Stakeholders
The promotion and development of adventure tourism will involve a diverse set of stakeholders,
whose role will be crucial for the success of the Strategy. The key stakeholders are:
(i). Central Ministries
(ii). State Governments
(iii). Panchayati Raj Institutions
(iv). Industry
(v). Non-government organizations
(vi). Local community
2.5.2. Central Ministries
Various Central Ministries are involved in the development of adventure tourism. Programs
and initiatives of the following Ministries need to be studied in detail for the promotion and
development of adventure tourism:
(i). Ministry of Tourism
The Ministry of Tourism is responsible for the promotion of Tourism in the Country.
The Ministry implements various schemes for creation of infrastructure, marketing
and promotion and skill development initiatives for tourism. Various schemes of the
Ministry can be leveraged for promotion and development of adventure tourism.
(ii). Ministry of Rural Development
Ministry of Rural Development is working towards sustainable and inclusive growth
of rural India through a multipronged strategy for eradication of poverty by increasing
livelihood opportunities, providing a social safety net and developing infrastructure for
growth. The Ministry can contribute to the development of adventure tourism through
various schemes being implemented by the Ministry and reap the benefits of adventure
tourism in promoting socio-economic development and livelihood opportunities.

08 | NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR ADVENTURE TOURISM
(iii). Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change
The Ministry is responsible for the implementation of policies and programmes relating
to the conservation of the country’s natural resources including its lakes and rivers,
its biodiversity, forests and wildlife. The Ministry of Environment is responsible for
framing laws and regulations for the environment and forests and has a key role in the
development of sustainable tourism.
(iv). Ministry of Culture
The Ministry of Culture is responsible to preserve, promote and disseminate all forms
of art and culture in the Country and has a large number of Institutions and organization
involved in the field of art and culture. The Ministry can contribute in the promotion of
culture and heritage in a sustainable and responsible manner.
(v). Ministry of Development of North-East Region
The Ministry of Development of the North-East Region is responsible for the matters
relating to the planning, execution and monitoring of development schemes and
projects in the North-East Region. Its vision is to accelerate the pace of socio-economic
development of the Region so that it may enjoy growth parity with the rest of the
country. Ministry can help development of adventure tourism in North-East Region.
(vi). Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship
Ministry of Skills can help with various skill development initiatives for sustainable and
responsible tourism including promotion of entrepreneurship for adventure tourism.
(vii). Ministry of Textiles
Ministry of Textiles is responsible for promotion of handicrafts and handlooms and
these activities are concentrated in rural areas. Many tourists may be interested to
know about handicrafts and the Ministry can provide support and synergy in developing
responsible tourism.
(viii). Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare
Department of Agriculture is responsible for agriculture, cooperation and farmers’
welfare. The Department implements various schemes, which impact the farming
activities and communities in rural areas. The Department may provide support
for Farmstays, agri tourism and other related activities, which have synergies with
sustainable and responsible tourism including adventure tourism.
(ix). Department of Youth Affairs and Sports
Department of Youth Affairs pursues the twin objectives of personality building and
nation-building, i.e. developing the personality of youth and involving them in various
nation-building activities to channelize the constructive and creative energies of the
youth. The Department also promotes adventure sports in the country and can contribute
to developing adventure tourism.

VISION, MISSION AND STRATEGY | 09
2.5.3. Indian Mountaineering Foundation
Indian Mountaineering Foundation (IMF) is the apex national body for mountaineering and
allied sports. IMF supports, promotes and regulates national and international climbing and
mountaineering in India. IMF is also engaged in mountain protection work, knowledge building and
creating awareness of the Indian Himalayas. IMF has a critical role in promoting adventure tourism
particularly mountaineering and trekking in the Himalayas.
2.5.4. State Governments
State Governments have a key role in the development of tourism in their respective states. Many
states have taken important measures for development of sustainable and responsible tourism.
Many states have prioritized development of adventure tourism in their respective States. States
can provide impetus to the development of adventure tourism by working in partnership with
Central Government and other stakeholders.
2.5.5. Panchayati Raj Institutions
Panchayati Raj Institutions have a strong influence on local communities and their support
is vital to the success of rural tourism. Village Panchayats and other institutions have to be
consulted and involved in the preparation of plans for developing adventure tourism in their
villages and also providing support for adventure tourism.
2.5.6. Industry
Industry players, who specialize in adventure tourism and tour operators apart from
accommodation providers such as hotels, B&B, Farm Stay owners and tourist guides are
important stakeholders. There is a need to involve industry players, who may be willing to be
part of developing sustainable tourism destinations. Industry can create innovative adventure
tourism products to attract visitors from India and abroad.
2.5.7. Local Community
The local community is a key stakeholder and has to be taken on board. The Community has
to be made aware of the benefits of sustainable adventure tourism, their apprehensions if any
have to be allayed and they have to be encouraged to participate and be part of the value
chain. In order to ensure inclusive and responsible tourism, most of the supplies and services
must be sourced from local providers. Their capacity building will have to be done to ensure
they become part of the supply chain.

3
10 | NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR ADVENTURE TOURISM
CHAPTER
Double Hump Camel Ride in Nubra Valley, Ladakh

STATE ASSESSMENT, RANKING & STRATEGY | 11
STATE ASSESSMENT,
RANKING & STRATEGY

12 | NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR ADVENTURE TOURISM
STATE ASSESSMENT,
RANKING & STRATEGY
3.1. Ranking of the States on Adventure Tourism
3.1.1. Ranking as a capacity building exercise
The Ministry of Tourism will conduct a ranking of the States on Adventure Tourism, with the key
objective to foster competitiveness and encourage States to work proactively towards developing
adventure tourism with the overarching objective of promoting sustainable tourism. It will be
implemented as a capacity development exercise to encourage mutual learning among all states
and to provide support in policy formulation and implementation.
3.1.2. Ranking to be based on globally recognized parameters
The broad areas and action points for the ranking exercise will be taken from global rankings of
countries in adventure tourism. There will also be a State Specific Report containing an analysis of
respective ecosystems for promotion of adventure tourism, strengths and priority areas for future
and best practices adopted by the States.
3.1.3. Ranking to be done through professional support
The ranking exercise will be carried out with professional support and through independent
experts from various Institutions both Government and Private. The Ministry of Tourism will
provide necessary training to the officials and other stakeholders and handhold the States for
their participation in the exercise.
3.2. Improving India’s world ranking in Adventure Tourism
Ministry of Tourism in collaboration with other Ministries and State Governments will prepare
a plan to improve the ranking of the country in the Global Adventure Tourism Development
Index (ATDI) prepared by the Adventure Travel Trade Association (ATTA). The improvement is
dependent on all stakeholders, government and private, making a concerted effort.

STATE ASSESSMENT, RANKING & STRATEGY | 13
3.3. Need for a comprehensive state strategy for adventure tourism
Adventure tourism requires support across the three tiers of the Government namely Central,
State and Local Government and strong engagement with private sector and local community.
A comprehensive strategy and long-term shared vision will bring all the stakeholders together
to unlock the State’s adventure tourism potential and use tourism as a vehicle for sustainable
social and economic development and jobs.
3.4. Guiding Principles for Adventure Tourism
The enabling environment for adventure tourism encompasses many interrelated factors that
affect the success of sustainable and responsible adventure tourism in the country or the
State:
(i). Adventure tourism in any area must be developed in consultation with local community
and a mechanism to seek social legitimacy, credibility and trust of the community must
be set out.
(ii). The strategy should prioritize adventure tourism by proposing investment in research
on target adventure markets, adventure trends, products with potential and encourage
public-private partnerships.
(iii). Adherence to safety standards is especially important for the adventure sector, where
activities can be risky. The strategy must ensure compliance and strict enforcement of
regulations regarding safety and service standards.
(iv). Adventure destinations need policies that prioritize the type of infrastructure valued by
adventure tourists such as signage, good guide training, and clean trails.
(v). A destination that is not well connected loses competitiveness. Adventure opportunities
need to be discoverable online and easily bookable. Destinations benefit when tourists
share their experiences in real-time, which may inspire others in that traveller’s network
to book a holiday as well.
(vi). In view of the increasing number of destinations offering adventure tourism activities,
price competitiveness of the destination is important unless it is offering something
unique and that must be communicated to the consumers. The strategy should also
include accurate and innovative marketing.
3.5. Assistance to the States for preparing Strategy
Ministry of Tourism will extend necessary assistance to the States in the preparation of the
State Strategy for Adventure Tourism.

14 | NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR ADVENTURE TOURISM
4
CHAPTER
Rafting in Rishikesh

SKILLS, CAPACITY BUILDING AND CERTIFICATION | 15
SKILLS, CAPACITY
BUILDING AND
CERTIFICATION

16 | NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR ADVENTURE TOURISM
SKILLS, CAPACITY BUILDING AND
CERTIFICATION
4.1. Skill Development of Adventure Activity Service Providers
Keeping in view the specialized nature of adventure activities and risks involved, proper
training and certification of the workforce of adventure activity service providers are essential.
The Ministry is already providing various skills in adventure tourism through Indian Institute
of Travel and Tourism, National Institute for Wate Sports, National Institute of Skiing and
Mountaineering. There are other training institutions run by Central Ministries and State
Governments. Detailed plans will be worked out in consultation with the States.
4.2. Skill Training and capacity building of local communities
The State Governments will identify the capacity needs of local communities to benefit from
adventure tourism, through jobs and entrepreneurship development, among other things.
This may include training to discharge specialized tasks such as guides, entrepreneurs for
the small-scale homestead-based hospitality industry, small business operators like souvenir
shops, equipment for hire, photography etc. Ministry of Tourism will support States in skill
training and capacity building of local communities.
4.3. Training and Certification of Guides
Guides are one of the important elements for ensuring a quality experience. It further assumes
significance in case of adventure tourism keeping in view the risks involved in adventure
activities. The Ministry of Tourism will strengthen the facilities for their training and certification
through nationally accepted certification processes across the country.

SKILLS, CAPACITY BUILDING AND CERTIFICATION | 17
4.4. National and State Resource Centres
The Ministry of Tourism will set up a National Resource Centre as a source of capacity and
expertise at the National level for adventure tourism. Similarly, the Ministry will also encourage
the State Governments to set up State Resource Centres. These resource centres along with
other identified institutions will help in developing adequate material, preparing a pool of
master trainers, training trainers and other capacity-building initiatives for Adventure Tourism.
4.5. Certification for Adventure Activity Service Providers
In order to promote the development of adventure tourism in a professional, sustainable and
responsible manner, Certification Scheme for tour operators, and other service providers for
adventure tourism will be framed. The entire process of adventure tourism certification shall
be end-to-end digital. The Certification will have attractive branding and it will be aggressively
promoted by the Ministry of Tourism through all its channels including the incredible India
website and mobile application.

18 | NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR ADVENTURE TOURISM
Indian Rhinoceros in it’s natural habitat

5
MARKETING AND PROMOTION | 19
CHAPTER
MARKETING AND
PROMOTION

20 | NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR ADVENTURE TOURISM
MARKETING AND PROMOTION
5.1. Creating a Sub-brand
To promote India as a destination for adventure tourism, a sub-brand, a sub brand around
adventure tourism shall be created under the overall “Incredible India” Brand.
5.2. Dedicated Promotional Campaign
There is a need to have a dedicated promotional campaign for positioning India as an
adventure tourism destination. India has to focus on utilising its natural heritage. This will
require a different promotional strategy than the one for selling monuments and culture. It has
to focus on our mountains, rivers, forests and deserts. These campaigns should be planned
in partnership with the States and Industry Stakeholders.
5.3. State Specific Campaigns
Every State has its unique offerings and therefore the States have to plan their campaign to
popularise the State as an adventure tourism destination. The States should also collaborate
with the Ministry of Tourism for creating synergies with the “Incredible India” campaign.
5.4. Destination Specific Campaigns
Every major adventure tourism destination also needs to plan a specific campaign to highlight
and showcase its unique tourism offerings. It is ultimately the destination that succeeds or
fails and it is therefore important to keep the focus on specific destinations.

MARKETING AND PROMOTION | 21
5.5. Campaign for Responsible Travellers
To ensure sustainable and responsible development of adventure tourism in the country, there
is a need to make the traveller aware of sustainable and responsible tourism. Responsible
behaviour by travellers and demand for more sustainable tourism will go a long way in
developing sustainable adventure tourism in the Country. The Ministry in partnership with the
States, Industry and Destinations will launch a campaign for responsible traveller.

6
22 | NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR ADVENTURE TOURISM
CHAPTER
Rajasthan Polo Club, Jaipur

NATIONAL ADVENTURE TOURISM SAFETY MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK | 23
NATIONAL ADVENTURE
TOURISM SAFETY
MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK

24 | NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR ADVENTURE TOURISM
NATIONAL ADVENTURE TOURISM
SAFETY MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK
6.1. Need for Adventure Tourism Safety
All adventure activities involve an inherent risk of harm and adventure activity service providers
have to manage those risks. The degree of risk varies among activities and locations.
Adventure activity providers must take the necessary steps to manage the risks and deliver
adventure activities safely while keeping alive the sense of adventure and excitement. To
promote adventure adventure tourism, there must be adequate measures for safety to
mitigate and reduce the risks involved in adventure activities.
6.2. Current Efforts for Adventure Tourism Safety
6.2.1. Advisory regarding Guidelines framed by ADTOI
The Ministry of Tourism has released the guidelines on safety and quality norms for Adventure
Tourism in India formulated along with the Adventure Tour Operators Association of India (ATOAI).
The guidelines have been framed for 15 Land Based, 7 Air Based and 7 Water Based activities,
which cover the entire gamut of Adventure Tourism available in India. The guidelines help
adventure tour operators and other stakeholders understand and execute safety measures in a
better manner.
6.2.2. State-level measures for adventure safety
In addition to the guidelines circulated by the Ministry of Tourism, some States have also adopted
various regulatory and administrative measures for promoting safety in adventure tourism. In
some cases, there have been judicial directions to the States to take necessary steps for safety
in various adventure activities.
6.2.3. Safety management standards
ISO 21101:2014 and BIS have laid down standards for safety management by adventure activity
service providers and act as benchmarks for adopting measures for safe adventure activities.

NATIONAL ADVENTURE TOURISM SAFETY MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK | 25
6.3. National Adventure Tourism Safety Management Framework
Ministry of Tourism will work with other Central Ministries, State Governments and Industry
Stakeholders to put in place a comprehensive framework for adventure tourism safety in the country.
6.4. Key objectives of Safety Framework
The key objectives of the framework would be:
(i). To mitigate risks in adventure activities
(ii). To provide guidance to Adventure Service Providers for safety
(iii). To encourage Adventure Service Providers for skill upgradation
(iv). To build confidence among the adventure tourists
(v). To set up internal and external audit systems
6.5. Guiding principles for Safety Framework
National Adventure Tourism Safety Management Framework will follow the following guiding
principles:
(i). Setting up safer conditions for the adventure tourists and the activity providers
(ii). To keep a check on all the adventure tourism activities
(iii). To keep the standards at par with global standards
(iv). Continuous improvement of Safety Management System
(v). Coordinate with global tourism bodies on adventure tourism safety
(vi). To promote effective communication of safety measures
6.6. Strategic elements of Safety Framework
National Adventure Tourism Safety Management Framework will have the following strategic
elements to comprehensively cover all the aspects of safety:
(i). National and State level Institutional set up for Adventure Safety
(ii). Standards of equipment required for adventure activities
(iii). Standard Operating Procedures for adventure activities
(iv). Communication – pre-activity, during activity and post-activity
(v). Registration and approval of Adventure Activity Service Providers
(vi). Inspection and Certification of Equipment
(vii). Training and Certification of Personnel/ Instructors/ Guides
(viii). Setting up of internal and external auditing systems
(ix). Risk management framework
(x). Incident recording and analysis
(xi). Root cause analysis and corrective action
(xii). Emergency Response Planning System

26 | NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR ADVENTURE TOURISM
THERMAL LAKES-Bathinda-Punjab

7
NATIONAL/ STATE LEVEL RESCUE AND COMMUNICATION GRID | 27
CHAPTER
NATIONAL/ STATE
LEVEL RESCUE AND
COMMUNICATION GRID

28 | NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR ADVENTURE TOURISM
NATIONAL/ STATE LEVEL RESCUE
AND COMMUNICATION GRID
7.1. Immediate evacuation and rescue to save casualty
The risk level varies in adventure tourism activities and sometimes it may be due to natural
conditions like weather and terrain sometimes may be due to some machine or equipment
failure or due to human error. Some of the adventure activities like high altitude mountaineering
and trekking may put adventure tourists into danger and require immediate rescue and
evacuation to save casualties. The immediate evacuation or rescue may have a different
impact on the Adventure Tourism perspective of the adventure tourists.
7.2. National and State Rescue and Communication Grid
An efficient Communication grid provides all the relevant information to the adventure tourists
and this reduces the confusion arising due to lack of information. The communication grid will
help set a fast communication among the Service Providers, Rescue Teams, Medical Teams
and Government Authorities. The Rescue and Communication Grids should be formed at
National, State and Regional Levels and should be connected.
7.3. Functions of Rescue and Communication Grid
The Rescue and Communication Grid Should be able to provide:
(i). Immediate rescue and evacuation of stranded adventure tourists from the site through
the ground, water, and air rescue teams.
(ii). Should be able to guide the related agencies to tackle the incidents and accidents.
(iii). Should have the live maps of all the adventure sites with latitudes and longitudes.

NATIONAL/ STATE LEVEL RESCUE AND COMMUNICATION GRID | 29
(iv). Must have the updated weather reports.
(v). Should be having a helpline number at National Level.
(vi). Allowing limited use of satellite phones and drones for the safety of tourists.
7.4. Composition of Rescue and Communication Grid
(i). Dedicated rescue teams covering each adventure site. It may be from an adventure
institute or maybe from the defence or paramilitary forces deputed nearby. NDRF and
SDRF teams may also be allotted the rescue team tasks.
(ii). Local health officers should be deputed in the rescue and communication grids so
they can guide the nearby hospitals regarding making necessary arrangements to
tackle accidents and incidents that may happen because of the adventure activities
happening in a particular zone.
(iii). Should have a member from the recognised adventure tourism association.
(iv). Should have a member from adventure training institute.

8
30 | NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR ADVENTURE TOURISM
CHAPTER
Auli, Uttarakhand - Aerial

DESTINATION AND PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT | 31
DESTINATION AND
PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT

32 | NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR ADVENTURE TOURISM
DESTINATION AND PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT
8.1. Identification of destinations, profiling and prioritization
8.1.1. Each State will identify the adventure destinations by offerings e.g. land, air and water-based
activities in soft, hard and other categories and create a detailed profile. It will include both
existing adventure tourist destinations as well as potential adventure tourist destinations.
8.1.2. The State Government will prioritize the development of identified destinations based on the
existing connectivity and tourist circuits, current tourism ecosystem, unique tourism offerings
of the destination/ site and future potential.
8.2. Development of prioritized destinations
Development plans for the prioritized adventure destinations shall be prepared based on
the detailed gap study and benchmarking with national and international best practices and
standards. It will include recommendations for connectivity, hard and soft interventions for
developing the destination.
Most of the adventure activities happen in remote areas and it is important to improve the
connectivity of these destinations/ attractions to reduce the travel time. The Development
plan must address the challenges of connectivity if any. The State Governments will explore
time-saving and cost-effective means such as Chopper and Sea Plane Connectivity.
8.3. Implementation of Development Plans
The State Nodal Agency responsible for adventure tourism will converge on various Central
Government and State Government plans for mobilizing resources for implementing the plan.
A destination or site-level management organization or committee should be set up with the
participation of all the stakeholders to spearhead the implementation of the development
and management plan on the ground.

DESTINATION AND PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT | 33
8.4. Private Sector partnership in Adventure Tourism
Strengths of the private sector in areas of marketing, operations, product and experience
creation, quality assurance and finance etc. shall be harnessed to develop and spread
ecotourism through mutually beneficial partnerships including public-private, community-
private, public-private-community among others.
8.5. Homestays and Community lodges
Homestays and community lodges, shall be encouraged through appropriate incentives.
Partnerships between community-based hospitality initiatives and private operators or
reputed conservation NGOs shall be encouraged with the objective of quality assurance.
Community initiatives will have to maintain the same environmental standards related to
water and energy conservation and garbage disposal as private operators.

9
34 | NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR ADVENTURE TOURISM
CHAPTER
POLO-Ladakh-J&K

GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK | 35
GOVERNANCE AND
INSTITUTIONAL
FRAMEWORK

36 | NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR ADVENTURE TOURISM
GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK
9.1. Action Plan
The Ministry of Tourism will prepare a detailed National Action Plan in consultation with
relevant Ministries, State Governments and Industry Stakeholders for the implementation
of the Strategy. The Action plan will be reviewed and monitored in accordance with the laid
down governance mechanism for the same.
State Governments will prepare State-specific policy and action plans for the development
of sustainable tourism, adventure tourism and ecotourism. The Ministry will help with model
policies and action plans for guidance of the States.
9.2. Governance
To ensure that the Strategy is effectively implemented, there is a need to review the progress
and resolve the issues. Following institutional structure will be followed for the same.
(i). Vision Group under Union Minister for Tourism
A Vision Group on Sustainable Tourism under the Union Minister for Tourism will be
set up. The Vision Group will include all the Stakeholder Ministries, States, industries,
NGOs, and Experts. It will provide an overall vision and guidance for the development
of Sustainable Tourism, Adventure Tourism, and Eco-Tourism in the Country.
(ii). IMCCT
Inter-Ministerial Coordination Committee under Cabinet Secretary, already in place, will
review and resolve inter-Ministerial issues, which may arise and provide guidance for
greater convergence of Central Schemes.

GOVERNANCE AND INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK | 37
(iii). National Board on Adventure Tourism under Secretary (Tourism)
National Board on Adventure Tourism under Secretary (Tourism) will be set up. The
National Board will include the representatives of the Key Ministries, leading States in
adventure tourism and representatives from Industry, NGOs, and Experts.
The Board will guide the operationalisation and implementation of various strategic
initiatives to strengthen the ecosystem for the development of adventure tourism in the
Country:
(i) Certification Schemes
(ii) Safety guidelines
(iii) Capacity building
(iv) Marketing and promotion
(v) Destination and product development
(vi) Private sector participation
(vii) Specific strategies
(viii) Any other measures for growth of sustainable tourism, adventure tourism and
ecotourism in the country.
(iv). State Steering Committee under Chief Secretary
The States will set up a State Steering Committee under Chief Secretary. The
Committee will have representation from all the relevant Departments at the State level,
representatives of Industry, NGOs and Experts. The Committee will coordinate, review
and resolve issues regarding implementation of strategy and other State-specific issues
for the development and promotion of adventure tourism in the State.
(v). District level Committee
The States will set up a district-level Committee under District Collector to coordinate
and review progress at the district level.
(vi). Site-level monitoring and Coordination Committee
The States will set up a destination/ site level Committees, consisting of local officials,
representatives of local communities, tour operators, lodge owners and other local
stakeholders to provide a forum/ platform for the guidance and smooth running of
adventure activities.
9.3. National Nodal Agency
Ministry of Tourism will designate National Nodal Agency to support the Ministry of Tourism in
coordinating and evolving strategy and actionable plans and schemes for the promotion and
development of Adventure Tourism in the Country. The Nodal agency will in particular assist
the Ministry in undertaking the following functions:

38 | NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR ADVENTURE TOURISM
(i). Preparation of a detailed Action Plan for the implementation of the Strategy.
(ii). Identifying national and global best practices and preparing tool kits for their replication
by the States
(iii). Benchmarking State policies and standards and preparing model policies and standards
(iv). Capacity Building measures include setting up of Resource Centres and Centres of
Excellence
(v). Facilitating the adoption of digital technologies for adventure tourism
(vi). Formulation of a dedicated scheme to support the development of adventure tourism in
the Country
(vii). Any other support, which can facilitate the Ministry of Tourism in development of
adventure tourism in the Country.
Scuba Diving in Havelock, Andaman

DESTINATION AND PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT | 39
The Nodal agency will set up appropriate structures and professional staffing for supporting
the Ministry of Tourism in the implementation of the strategy. The Ministry will provide
necessary budgetary support to the Nodal Agency through various schemes for promotion
and development of tourism.
9.4. State Nodal Agency
The States will designate a State Nodal Agency to coordinate, facilitate and promote
adventure tourism in the State. The agency should be provided with adequate budgetary
resources and staff to carry out the assigned responsibilities. The Ministry of Tourism will
work with the designated State Nodal Agency to provide necessary financial and technical
support under various schemes of the Ministry for the development of tourism infrastructure,
tourism promotion, and capacity building of tourism service providers.
Issued by Ministry of Tourism vide O.M. No. NT-1401/2/2021 dated 29th April 2022.

40 | NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR ADVENTURE TOURISM

DESTINATION AND PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT | 41

Ministry of Tourism
Government of India
APRIL 2022