NATIONAL LIVESTOCK POLICY, 2013
Government of India
Ministry of Agriculture
Department of Animal Husbandry, Dairying & Fisheries



INDEX
1 Policy Framework 1
2 Need for National Livestock Policy 1
3 Major Challenges 3
3.1 Shortage of Feed and Fodder 3
3.2 Low Productivity 3
3.3 Livestock Health 3
3.4 Livestock and Environment 4
3.5 Knowledge Gap 4
3.6 Inadequate Infrastructure for Marketing, Processing and Value 4
Addition
4 Aims and Objectives of National Livestock Policy 4
5 Livestock Research and Development 6
6 Strengthening Infrastructure and Services 7
7 Dissemination of Technology /Extension 8
8 Re-orientation of Breeding Policy for Livestock 9
8.2 Breeding Policy for Cattle and Buffalo 9
8.3 Breeding Policy for Sheep and Goats 10
8.4 Breeding Policy for Pig 10
8.5 Breeding Policy for Yak and Mithun 11
8.6 Breeding of Equines 11
8.7 Breeding of Camels 11
8.8 Breeding Policy for any other useful Livestock 11
9 New Technologies for Livestock Breeding 11
9.2 Conservation of Animal Biodiversity 11
10 Strategy for Enhancing Livestock Production 12
10.1 Milk 12
10.2 Meat and Wool 12
10.3 Egg and Poultry 13
11 Dairying 13
11.1 Strengthening Infrastructure and Handling Capacity 13
11.2 Strengthening Dairy Cooperatives 14
11.3 Clean Milk Production, Hygiene and Quality Control 14
11.4 Diversification and Value Addition 14
12 Feed and Fodder 15
12.1 Enrichment of Straw Quality 15
12.2 Cereals and Oil Meals 15
12.3 Production of Fodder and Fodder Seeds 15
12.4 Compound Feed and Balanced Ration 16
12.5 Development of Pasture Land and Common Property Resources 16
12.6 Data for Feed and Fodder 16
12.7 Monitoring Quality of Livestock Seeds 16
13 Animal Health 17
13.1 Veterinary Services 17
13.2 Control and Eradication of Infectious Diseases 17
13.3 Disease Free Zones 17
13.4 Diagnosis, Quarantine and Legislative Back-up 18
13.5 Disease Surveillance and Forecasting 18

13.6 Alternate System of Medicine 18
13.7 Control of Zoonoses 19
13.8 Animal Biosecurity 19
13.9 Contingency Plan for Disaster Management 19
13.10 Animal Welfare 19
14 Meat Production and Processing 20
15 Quality Control and Food Safety 20
16 Institutional Credit and Livestock Insurance 21
17 Livestock and Environment 22
18 Information System and Human Resources 22
18.1 Animal Production and Health Information 22
18.2 Human Resources and Training 23
19 Institutional Mechanism for Implementation 23

THE NATIONAL LIVESTOCK POLICY, 2013
1. Policy Framework
1.1 The National Policy for Farmers, 2007, which aims to improve viability of farming
through sustainable development of agriculture sector with the main goal to improve welfare
of farmers and farm income, also provides for sustained development of the livestock and
fisheries sectors. The National Livestock Policy, 2013 has been formulated to have a policy
framework for improving productivity of the livestock sector in a sustainable manner, taking
into account the provisions of the National Policy of Farmers, 2007 and the recommendations
of the stakeholders, including the States.
1.2 Under the Constitution of India, livestock development falls within the
jurisdiction of the State Government. However, the Central Government supplements
and complements the efforts of the State Governments through different schemes and
programmes apart from creating an enabling environment to promote sustainable
growth of the sector.
2. Need for a National Livestock Policy
2.1 Livestock is an integral part of India’s agricultural economy and plays a
multifaceted role in providing livelihood support to the rural population. Livestock
sector apart from contributing to national economy in general and to agricultural
economy in particular, also provides employment generation opportunities, asset
creation, coping mechanism against crop failure and social and financial security.
Livestock is the main source of animal protein for the population. It is estimated that
about 70 million rural households own livestock of one species or the other. Women
constitute about 69% of workforce engaged in livestock sector. The resource-poor
small and marginal farmers and landless labourers own majority of the livestock
resources. Hence sustainable development of the livestock sector would lead to more
inclusive development and empowerment of women.

2.2 Past efforts for development of livestock sector included systematic development of
organized dairy marketing through appropriate technology and cold chain/ processing logistics
by organizing the farmers into cooperatives at village/ district/ state level duly supported by
National Dairy Development Board through programmes like Operation Flood. This has also
resulted in increased productivity of milch animals and income of farmers apart from making
available quality milk to the consumers at a reasonable price. This has also successfully
propelled the country to be the highest producer of milk in the world. Development of poultry
has been driven mainly by private sector initiatives. Efforts of Government also included
initiative for cross-breeding of non-descript cattle with exotic germplasm to improve
productivity and steps for control of animal diseases through preventive vaccination and
control measures. However, commensurate efforts for other livestock species were lacking.
Further, the challenges like comparatively lower productivity, susceptibility of cross-bred cattle
to various exotic animal diseases, shortage of feed and fodder and adverse impact on account
of climate change need to be addressed to sustain the growth in the sector.
2.3 Livestock production systems in India are mostly based on traditional knowledge, low
cost agricultural residues and agro-byproducts leading to lower productivity. There is an urgent
need to have a national policy in place, to ensure faster growth of the livestock sector,
increased productivity and creation of employment opportunities in rural areas, leading to
poverty reduction.
2.4 Livestock sector is facing newer challenges, like increased incidence of emerging and
re-emerging animal diseases, vulnerability to exotic diseases, shortage of feed and fodder and
need to increase production to meet demand for animal products etc. Many of these
challenges like animal diseases, shortage of feed and fodder and dissemination of technology
would require an appropriate national strategy to address these with support of the State
Governments.
2.5 Livestock species and breeds have ecological distribution and do not follow the geo-
specific boundaries of the states. Therefore, sustainable livestock development requires
integrated efforts across the states with an overall national perspective.
2.6 The National Livestock Policy would facilitate better inter-state coordination in
regulating the export and import of livestock and livestock products, feed and food safety,

biosecurity and conservation of indigenous breeds, which are essential for development of
livestock sector.
3. Major Challenges
The livestock sector in India faces the following major challenges which need to be addressed
enabling the sector to grow according to its potential:-
3.1 Shortage of Feed and Fodder: While the livestock population is increasing, the gap
between the requirement and availability of feed and fodder is increasing primarily due to
decreasing area under fodder cultivation and reduced availability of crop residues as fodder.
There is continuous shrinkage of common property resources leading to over grazing in the
existing grasslands. It is imperative to arrange sufficient good quality feed and fodder for
efficient utilization of genetic potential of the various livestock species and for sustainable
improvement in productivity.
3.2 Low Productivity: Although India is a major producer of livestock products the
average productivity of livestock is lower compared to world average. Inadequate availability
of feed and fodder, insufficient coverage through artificial insemination, low conception rates,
non-availability of quality males for breeding, poor management practices, high mortality and
morbidity losses due to diseases, inadequate marketing infrastructure and unorganized
marketing are the other major concerns.
3.3 Livestock Health: A large number of infectious and metabolic diseases prevalent
in Indian livestock have serious implication for animal productivity, export potential and safety/
quality of livestock products, and many of these diseases have zoonotic implications. The
current efforts of prevention and control of livestock diseases needs to be strengthened. There
is a shortage of veterinary and para-veterinary manpower and facilities including mechanisms
for diagnosis, treatment, tracking and prevention of the diseases. Adequate infrastructure for
ensuring bio-security, proper quarantine systems and services to prevent the ingress of
diseases across the states and national borders is not available.

3.4 Livestock and Environment: Climate change and global warming may have serious
implications to the livestock sector. These may be manifested in the form of heat stress, loss
of animal habitat especially in coastal areas, scarcity of quality feed and fodder, and changes
in epidemiological pattern of vector borne diseases, etc., ultimately leading to reduction in
production and therefore, economic losses. Mitigating the impact of climate change, calls for
critical appraisal of the situation on continuous basis and advance planning.
3.5 Knowledge Gap: Most of the livestock producers being small and marginal farmers,
their capacity to mobilize resources required to absorb the latest technologies developed by
research institutions are limited. Absence of an effective extension machinery for this purpose
compounds the problem. Lack of access to institutional finance is a major constraint in
attracting investment required for improving productivity by adopting latest technology.
3.6 Inadequate Infrastructure for Marketing, Processing and Value Addition:
The livestock sector is handicapped due to inadequate marketing and processing
infrastructure as a result of which the primary producers do not get remunerative prices most
of the times. Although various initiatives for dairy development have resulted in vibrant dairy
cooperatives in many states, but still large number of dairy farmers are not covered by
cooperatives. The dairy cooperatives handle only about 8% of milk production. Still major
share of marketable surplus of milk and other livestock products are not handled by organized
processing industry, resulting in reduced price realization by farmers and post production
losses and wastages.
4. Aims and Objectives of the National Livestock Policy
4.1 The National Livestock Policy (referred as ‘policy’ hereafter), aims at increasing
livestock productivity and production in a sustainable manner, while protecting the
environment, preserving animal bio-diversity, ensuring bio-security and farmers’ livelihood.
With this goal, the main objectives of this policy are as under:

4.1.1 To support the existing low input production systems for improving productivity and
income so as to improve socio-economic status of a vast majority of our livestock producers,
most of which are women and small farmers.
4.1.2 To support research and development initiatives on issues pertaining to livestock sector
for improving production and productivity, bio-security and profitability.
4.1.3 To encourage establishment and growth of self-supporting financially viable, medium
and large commercial livestock production units capable of adopting latest technology
including facility for processing and value addition.
4.1.4 To improve the productivity of livestock and poultry by promoting and disseminating the
technologies developed by the research system.
4.1.5 To promote conservation of animal bio-diversity; conservation and genetic improvement
of important indigenous breeds of livestock and poultry in the country.
4.1.6 To increase availability of feed and fodder resources to meet the requirement of
livestock to attain optimal productivity.
4.1.7 To strengthen overall animal health cover through prevention, control and eradication
of various disease conditions and encourage/enable the dairy cooperatives to extend
veterinary services to farmers.
4.1.8 To focus on production of quality livestock products as per the international standards
for food safety.
4.1.9 To encourage value addition of livestock products like milk and milk products, eggs, wool
and meat & meat products etc.

4.1.10 To expand capacity of milk handled by organized dairy sector including cooperatives.
4.1.11 To ensure transmission and application of improved technology and management
practices to the doorstep of the farmers and the entrepreneurs.
4.1.12 To create an enabling environment to attract investment for improving infrastructure
support, livestock production, processing, value addition and marketing in the sector.
5. Livestock Research and Development
5.1 To improve the productivity and health of various species of livestock in a sustainable
manner while reducing the negative effects on environment, there is need for greater focus on
research and development particularly to address problems faced by farmers. The efforts for
basic and applied research to generate new knowledge, technology, strategies and application
procedures related to the various problems of the livestock sector and farmers would be
strengthened.
5.2 Better coordination and convergence in the research efforts of various research and
development Institutions including the ICAR, State Agricultural and Veterinary Universities, All
India Coordinated Research Projects, National Bureaus, NGOs and private sector R&D
institutions will be necessary for optimum utilization of research resources and efforts. State
Governments may consider to constitute state level coordination committees for this purpose.
5.3 The research and development activities would focus on various issues related to
livestock genetics, breeding, feeding, management, therapeutics, disease prevention, control
and eradication, development of thermostable vaccines, biosecurity, environmental pollution
and green house gas emission, livestock product diversification and quality control, marketing
and business management and extension strategies etc.

5.4 Research management will be improved for effectiveness and efficiency. Demand-
driven and farmer-oriented issues will be searched on priority with close co-operation among
researchers, industry and the customers.
5.5 Technology, modulated as per needs and suitability to various livestock production
systems, plays an important role in improving efficiency and exploitation of production potential
of that system. Therefore, research for development and adaptation of technology for various
aspects of different production systems prevailing in the country would be promoted. Focus
would be on developing area and system specific low cost technologies using locally available
resources and knowledge.
5.6 Efforts would be made to identify the skills necessary to be imparted to the farmers
and entrepreneurs to facilitate dissemination and adoption of technologies developed through
research efforts. The research institution in the areas relating to livestock would take steps to
identify such skills, develop the curriculum for short term modular training courses including
criteria for evaluation and conduct training of trainers through which the trainings would be
imparted to the farmers.
5.7 The research institutions would be actively associated in organising effective
demonstration of the technologies developed for the benefit of farmers.
6. Strengthening Infrastructure and Services
6.1 A fairly large infrastructure of veterinary institutions, vaccine and diagnostic production
units, semen stations and artificial insemination breeding farms, feed and fodder production
units etc. are owned by government. Some of these are not used optimally. These facilities
would be restructured and strengthened for effective utilization and for ensuring optimal
services. The cooperatives, NGOs, farmers’ organizations and other private organizations
will be associated to assist in this endeavor. The Government will create enabling
environment at the national level and inclusive planning at regional and community level for
generation and delivery of these services in the rural and urban areas on the principle of cost
recovery basis in a phased manner.

6.2 Livestock marketing facility is inadequate and often unorganized. Lack of proper
marketing facility and related infrastructure limit the benefits of livestock enterprises. It is
necessary to create necessary infrastructure, policy and procedures to organize animal trade
for better returns for farmers and faster growth of livestock sector.
6.3 The processing industry would be encouraged to provide basic services and
technology to farmers relating to livestock production and to establish marketing linkages to
ensure remunerative returns to the farmers. Public Private Partnership initiatives for this
purpose would be supported under ongoing schemes. Livestock farmers would be
encouraged to organize as SHGs, Farmer Producers’ Organization, Producers’ Companies
etc. to have better access to credit, inputs and marketing opportunity.
7. Dissemination of Technology/Extension
7.1 Extension and technology transfer have played a crucial role in green revolution. The
extension infrastructure for livestock sector, however, is grossly inadequate and needs
revamping. Very often, the livestock related technologies developed or modified in the
research institutes do not reach the end-users for want of efficient and effective extension
mechanisms and procedures. This remains one of the biggest stumbling blocks in the
transformation of innovations into practice. Institutional, infrastructural and strategic
reorientation will be made to ensure effective percolation and adoption of the various newer,
useful technologies in the field. The mode of transfer of technology will be reoriented to ensure
that the livestock farmers reap the benefit of investment in livestock research and for this
purpose, use of Information and Communication Technology will be encouraged. The efforts
of Government will be augmented through involvement of private sector, NGOs and
progressive farmers and their organizations.
7.2 The extension services for livestock sector is grossly inadequate and needs radical
revamping. Active participation of farmers is an essential prerequisite for the success of the
programmes. The need for intervention in livestock sector is so large that the government
efforts alone would not be sufficient to meet the requirements. The private sector and NGOs
with adequate experience will be encouraged to take active part in extension and development

and transfer of technology. Progressive farmers rearing high quality livestock will be
encouraged to act as extension agents by giving them due recognition. Artificial Insemination
technicians/paravets will be adequately trained for delivery of extension and other services at
the farmers’ doorstep. Skill building of the key personal will be taken up at a regular interval.
8. Re-orientation of Breeding Policy for Livestock
8.1 States would be encouraged to review their respective breeding policies for different
livestock species. Species-wise breeding programmes will be fine-tuned and implemented for
faster growth in production.
8.2 Breeding Policy for Cattle and Buffalo: For increasing milk production in cattle and
buffaloes and to increase their life time productivity, a broad framework of policy would include
the following:-
i. Selective breeding of defined indigenous breeds of cattle having high milk yield,
and those with excellent draft abilities, will be promoted to improve their
production and reproduction potential. This will help their proliferation,
conservation and genetic upgradation. Efforts will be made to import semen of
these breeds if necessary, to avoid/reduce inbreeding. Intrusions of cross-
breeding in their defined breeding tracts will be avoided.
ii. Cross-breeding of non-descript and low producing cattle with high yielding exotic
breeds suitable for respective agro-climatic conditions, will be encouraged in
selected areas having adequate facility for feed and fodder and marketing
facilities etc. Upgradation of non-descript and low producing cattle with defined
indigenous breeds in resource deficient areas and the breeding tracts of defined
indigenous breeds would be encouraged.
iii. Buffalo development will aim at improving milk production and to hasten growth,
maturity and proliferation. Selective breeding of established native breeds, and

upgrading low producers through breeding with defined high milk yielding breeds
will be undertaken. If required, semen may also be imported to reduce
inbreeding. Cross-breeding of non-descript buffalo population with improved
indigenous breeds will be considered, where appropriate.
iv. Production of breeding males having high genetic potential will be an essential
element of the breeding policy for each species and breed. Formation of breed
associations by involving farmers for improvement of indigenous breeds of
various species and identification/registration of animals having good genetic
potential would be promoted by providing financial, technical and organizational
assistance.
v. There is a need to focus on the hitherto neglected natural mating system and to
produce quality disease free high genetic merit bulls for natural service through
implementation of massive pedigree selection and progeny testing programmes.
vi. For the purpose of cross-breeding, semen of progeny tested bulls would be used
as far as possible.
8.3 Breeding Policy for Sheep and Goat: This will aim to improve growth, body
weight, reproductive efficiency, meat and wool quality and quantity, and to reduce
mortality. An area specific approach would be adopted to improve quality and quantity
of coarse wool and fine wool. Main focus will be to produce and distribute good quality
rams/bucks of quality indigenous breeds which can thrive in different agro-climatic
conditions. Artificial insemination would also be encouraged. Cross-breeding with
high yielding exotic and other native breeds of goats will also be considered.
8.4 Breeding Policy for Pig: This will focus on improving growth, prolificacy,
quality and quantity of meat produced, survivability and utilization of low cost locally
available feed and managemental conditions. While efforts will continue to conserve
some of the meritorious indigenous breeds of pigs in their defined local tracts,
crossbreeding with high yielding, disease resistant exotic breeds will be encouraged,
with maximum 50% level of exotic germplasm in crossbreeding.

8.5 Breeding of Yak and Mithun would be supported in high altitude agro climatic
regions for preservation and further development through selection, and where
necessary, through crossbreeding with exotic germplasm.
8.6 Breeding of Equines: Breeding of horses, mules, and donkeys would be
promoted to produce high quality stock for draft power and sports purposes. Selective
breeding of indigenous breeds and cross breeding, where necessary, will be
considered.
8.7 Breeding of Camels: It will aim at improving their desert specific draft power,
milk production, disease resistance and sports traits. Breeding of Double hump camel
in high altitude areas would be supported with import of semen to minimize otherwise
high chances of inbreeding.
8.8 Breeding Policy for any other Useful Livestock can also be developed as per
local need.
9. New Technologies for Livestock Breeding
9.1 Newer breeding and reproductive technologies, including those involving
biotechnology and genetic engineering/genetic marker technology developed from
time to time, will be adopted for faster implementation of various breed improvement
programmes and for increasing production. Efforts will be made to develop semen
sexing technology to provide greater choice regarding breeding to farmers. The
delivery of breeding services would be regulated by fixing standards with periodic
evaluation of service providers.
9.2 Conservation of Animal Bio-Diversity
9.2.1 The country has rich and diverse genetic resources of livestock in the form of a
large number of species, breeds, and strains within a species. India has some of the
best breeds of cattle and buffaloes with traits for dairy, draught power and dual
purposes, several carpet wool breeds of sheep, highly prolific breeds of goats and

adaptive breeds of poultry. These breeds of livestock and poultry are essentially the
products of long term natural selection and are better adapted to tropical fodder,
environment and diseases, and perform under low and medium inputs. Some of these
breeds are suited to particular agro-climatic conditions of the country. Some of these
breeds have useful genes for fast growth and prolificacy. Such utility genes and
breeds would be identified, conserved and utilized for breeding and research. The
focus would be on conservation of indigenous breeds of livestock and poultry.
9.2.2 Pastoral communities, particularly those managing migratory animals like
buffaloes, sheep, goats, yaks etc. shall be supported through creation of facilities
along their migratory routes for feeding, breeding, healthcare, housing, and market
channels for their produce and animals. Indigenous knowledge of pastoral
communities about animal maintenance and breeding would be documented with
active involvement of communities, breeders’ associations, gaushalas and NGOs.
10. Strategy for Enhancing Livestock Production
10.1 Milk
The yield levels for cows and buffaloes of 1281 kg and 1707 kg per year respectively
(as on 2011-12) would be improved through increased availability of feed and fodder,
genetic upgradation through cross breeding, strengthening progeny testing, selective
breeding, converting unproductive animals to productive and improved disease control
and surveillance etc. The problem of infertility among improved milch animals would
be suitably addressed through provision of area specific mineral mixture and
appropriate feed and fodder.
10.2 Meat and Wool
Emphasis on small ruminants and pigs would be to improve nutrition, genetics,
breeding strategies and health cover to increase proliferacy, carcass weights, and
reduce mortality leading to improvement in quality and quantity of meat, skin and wool.
Selection of breeding stocks through large scale screening involving farmers flocks
would be taken as a national program. The farmers would be encouraged to be

organized as cooperatives or Farmers’ Producers’ Organization for better access to
inputs and marketing.
10.3 Egg and Poultry
10.3.1 The commercial poultry sector is highly organized and a substantial part of the
production of germplasm, feed and vaccines etc., is being undertaken by the private
sector. The backyard poultry, which produces 30 to 35% of the eggs and highly
important for livelihood and nutritional securities of the rural poor, is, however, facing
many problems. The focus, therefore, would be to provide appropriate support to this
sector in the form of financial assistance, genetic stocks and improved technologies,
scientific advice, extension/awareness, particularly on bio-security measures.
Conservation of indigenous poultry breeds would be encouraged for producing poultry
birds suitable for backyard poultry.
10.3.2 Appropriate support would be provided to backyard poultry farmers in
rural areas to promote clusters or small holder’s poultry estates.
10.3.3 To provide remunerative marketing opportunities to farmers, mutually beneficial
contracts between the poultry farmers and purchasers and poultry industry would be
encouraged so as to minimize the risks of the farmers. Small farmers would be
provided opportunities to associate with corporates in an integrated model through
self-help groups or co-operatives.
10.3.4 Programmes for other avian species would be encouraged taking into account
existing laws and regulations, result of research on economics and likely impact on
environment.
11. Dairying
11.1 Strengthening Infrastructure and Handling Capacity

Presently about 16% of milk produced in the country is handled in organized sector. Efforts
would be made to set up collection centres along the milk routes to increase procurement in
the organized sector to facilitate scientific handling as per the standard quality norms. To
ensure that more and more milk is processed, the efforts and resources of both cooperative
and private sectors would be synergized. By creating a facilitating environment, self-
sustaining viable dairy units would be promoted. To improve quality milk production,
necessary veterinary support, infrastructure and cold chain facility would be expanded by
suitably encouraging cooperatives and incentivizing the private sector.
11.2 Strengthening Dairy Cooperatives
Greatest strength of the cooperatives has been their primary milk producers and the rural
procurement structure. There is need to strengthen their rural base. Since cooperatives carry
major share of the organized dairy business in India, effective steps would be taken to make
them financially viable and resurgent business organizations. The dairy cooperatives would
be assisted to expand their milk routes, procurement infrastructure and processing capability
and would be encouraged to provide breeding and veterinary services to farmers.
11.3 Clean Milk Production, Hygiene and Quality Control
There is growing concern on excessive residues of fertilizers, pesticides, antibiotics and other
non-biological toxicants in milk and milk products. The policy would promote clean milk
production with quality and food safety of international standards for benefit of farmers and
consumers. The methods of collection, storage, transport, processing and testing of milk will
be modernized to ensure quality. Administrative and regulatory mechanism would be put in
place to ensure supply of safe milk as per the standard quality. These would be supported by
a network of internationally accredited laboratories for food safety standards and application
of total quality management.
11.4 Diversification and Value Addition
With improving standards of living, the consumers are becoming discerning for a variety of
products. Diversification of dairy products including probiotics would be promoted to meet
local demands and for exports. Public Private Partnership initiatives would be supported to
ensure better marketing opportunities and remunerative returns to the dairy farmers.

12 Feed and Fodder
12.1 Enrichment of Straw Quality
12.1.1 Straws, crop residues, stovers and other agricultural by-products are likely to continue
to be major input as livestock feed for ruminants. To avoid wastage of large quantity of straw
and agro-industrial by-products, enrichment and densification of crop residue would be
encouraged by using existing and newly developed technologies. Biotechnological
techniques, which can develop recombinant microbes to digest straws, utilize lignin and its
by-products and release carbohydrates through a solid state fermentation process, shall be
developed by involving research organizations of the government and private sector.
12.2 Cereals and Oil Meals
The area under cultivation of coarse grains has gone down over the years resulting in shortage
of feed ingredients and concentrates. Efforts will be made to enhance availability of coarse
grains and oil meals for livestock and poultry sector. Steps would be taken in consultation with
agriculture department to increase area under high yielding/hybrid varieties of coarse grains
including maize to increase its production. Non-conventional animal feed resources would be
exploited to make available protein and energy for livestock feeding.
12.3 Production of Fodder and Fodder Seeds
Efforts will be made to increase production of quality fodder seeds through necessary
incentives, arranging foundation seeds of different high yielding fodder varieties and modern
scientific farming procedures etc. Efforts will also be made to increase area under fodder
cultivation, especially through use of barren and fallow lands and silviculture. Appropriate
resources and technologies will be made available to ensure quality fodder seed production.
Fodder cultivation in degraded land and forest land would be taken wherever possible with
the help of farming community. Round the year availability of quality fodder through promotion
of hay, silage and fodder banks etc. will be emphasized. Non-conventional sources of feed
such as azolla, processed vegetables and fruit wastes etc. will be promoted.
12.4 Compound Feed and Balanced Ration

The quality of compound feed is extremely important for enhancing production and
productivity as well as farm economics. Standards will be developed for compound feed for
various species of livestock, including cattle, buffalo, pigs, sheep, goats and camels and
balanced ration with locally available ingredients will be encouraged. The livestock and
poultry owners will be educated about the benefits of quality feed, balanced ration, bypass
protein and bypass fat. Feed quality standards would be strengthened. Quality of packaged
balanced feeds shall be regulated in accordance with BIS standards. Use of special feed
supplements and area specific mineral mixtures and ration balancing would be promoted.
12.5 Development of Pasture Land and Common Property Resources
Common property resources available for grazing in rural areas have not only shrunk in size
but have become less productive because of neglect and overgrazing. Physical availability
and production potential of pastures and grazing community lands will be assessed and steps
will be taken to rejuvenate such lands by planting fodder trees and grasses. Integrated land
use planning with livestock as a component will be encouraged through Panchayati Raj
Institutions.
12.6 Data for Feed and Fodder
There is a lack of adequate and genuine data on production and availability of various types
of fodder and feed grains. Competent agencies will be encouraged to generate real time and
time-period data on fodder production, feed grain production, land availability for grassland
and other pasture grounds etc.
12.7 Monitoring quality of Livestock Feed
States may collect random samples of different brands/ unbranded commercial livestock
feeds sold in the market to check the quality vis-à-vis the approved standards/ quality
prescribed by the Bureau of Indian Standards and take action as per law to prevent sale of
sub-standard livestock feeds. Farmers may also be informed by disseminating the results of
testing. State governments and state agriculture/ veterinary universities would be encouraged
to set up feed analytical laboratories to ensure this.

13. Animal Health
13.1 Veterinary Services
13.1.1. Veterinary hospitals, dispensaries, Aid Centers, diagnostic laboratories and veterinary
manpower already available are much less than what is required. These services would be
improved and expanded and will continue to be provided by the state owned facilities with an
appropriate system of recovery of cost wherever feasible. Private investment to improve
delivery of animal health services including facilities by private veterinary graduates would be
encouraged. Mobile veterinary dispensaries with provision for vaccination and facilities to
generate awareness of farmers regarding various livestock management issues would be
promoted to improve outreach. For companion animals, state governments may consider to
extend the veterinary services on full cost recovery basis.
13.2 Control and Eradication of Infectious Diseases
Diseases and pests not only cause enormous production losses but also hamper export trade
in livestock and livestock products. Prevention and control of infectious diseases being a
community welfare activity would continue to be emphasized through various programmes
supported by government. These prophylactic services would be gradually expanded by
involving NGOs, cooperatives and private veterinary practitioners. The existing mechanism
for enforcement of laws to prevent spread of infectious animal diseases would be
strengthened.
13.3 Disease-Free Zones
Efforts will be made to make the country free from economically important infectious diseases.
Since Rinderpest, the premier scourge of cattle, has already been eradicated from India, the
focus will be now on control and eradication of Foot and Mouth Disease, Peste des Petitis
Ruminants (PPR), Brucellosis, Swine Fever and other diseases having major impact on
productivity. Disease free zones as per OIE guidelines will be created in areas with export
potential. Efforts for prevention and control of various other bacterial, viral and parasitic
diseases of livestock and poultry shall be strengthened. Availability of necessary vaccines
and their quality control will be streamlined.

13.4 Diagnosis, Quarantine and Legislative back-up
A comprehensive animal health cover requires adequate facilities for prompt diagnosis of
livestock diseases. Facilities for specific and general disease diagnosis shall be strengthened
by introducing quality management system. Quarantine facilities would be strengthened to
prevent the ingress of exotic diseases. The system of sanitary certification for export would
be synchronized with global standards to promote export. To control inter-state transmission
of diseases, the movement of livestock from one state to another shall be regulated through
Central legislative back-up. Mechanism for emergency preparedness against emerging and
exotic diseases would be put in place.
13.5 Disease surveillance and forecasting
There is a need to establish effective and integrated surveillance, vigilance, prevention and
control mechanisms designed to protect the productivity and safety of farm animals and an
efficient forecasting and management information system on occurrence of diseases,
particularly of epidemic and endemic nature. Prompt collection and validation of animal
disease information and creation of database would help in launching of various disease
control programmes. This system would also help in meeting the international obligation of
notification of certain diseases.
13.6 Alternate System of Medicine
13.6.1 Traditional and time tested medicinal practices followed in rural areas for combating
various animal diseases require strengthening and documentation. An inventory of traditional
Indian medicinal practice for animal health would be prepared for adoption. Other alternate
systems of medicine adopted in the country would be used for ailments against which these
are effective.
13.6.2 For the traditional medicines, the challenges include foolproof specifications,
procurement of pure ingredients and the quality end product. Through understanding and
knowledge of the factors and conditions involved, the quality of traditional medicines would
be standardized.

13.6.3 The gaushalas and other similar organizations working in the area of animal welfare
would be associated for conservation and improvement of indigenous breeds and for
popularization of traditional medicines for livestock health.
13.7 Control of Zoonoses
Special emphasis will be laid to create awareness for control of zoonotic diseases and
veterinary drug abuse to protect human health. Necessary bio-security measures will be
taken to reduce the incidence and spread of such diseases. “One-Health” concept will be
strengthened through linkages with other concerned departments, such as Department of
Health and Family Welfare.
13.8 Animal Biosecurity
A national institutional mechanism, in collaboration with the ICAR and other institutions would
be put in place to deal with the issue of biosecurity in the livestock sector. Breach of this would
endanger the livestock populations, ultimately impacting the food security. States would be
encouraged to promote responsible use of antibiotics and other medicines harmful to the
environment. Necessary legislative back-up for enforcement of biosecurity, strong quarantine
facility, appropriate risk analysis and risk mitigation will be integrated in the mechanism.
Import of livestock, their products, vaccines and diagnostics will be regulated to prevent
ingress of exotic diseases.
13.9 Contingency Plan for Disaster Management
Contingency plans will be prepared to maintain the productivity and welfare of livestock and
poultry sector during various types of natural calamities and drought conditions. Such plans
would primarily aim at improving veterinary care and making available feed and fodder through
greater emphasis on fodder productivity and storage through silage or fodder blocks.
13.10 Animal Welfare
Welfare of animal is an integral part of livestock production system. Compliance of existing
laws of the land on animal welfare will be ensured at every stage of value chain including
production, transportation, slaughter, care of draught animal and animal handling. Animal
welfare will be included as a compulsory subject in the course curricula of animal and

veterinary sciences both for graduation and diploma courses. Research to reduce drudgery
of animals will be promoted.
14. Meat Production and Processing
The unorganized slaughter some time may cause environmental and public health problems,
apart from often being cruel. The slaughter houses, meat production and processing units
should be located keeping in view environmental, social and logistic requirements. Creation
of necessary infrastructure for meat production facilities in rural areas will be promoted as
forward linkage for animal producers. Integrated modern abattoirs would be encouraged
taking into account the legal regulatory provisions for production of quality meat, to ensure
zero environmental pollution, minimize wastage of byproducts, utilize edible and inedible
byproducts, prevent undue cruelty to animals and to promote use of humane methods of
slaughter. The regulatory mechanism for quality meat production should be synchronized
with global health standards for domestic consumption as well as for export purposes.
15. Quality Control and Food Safety
15.1 The Food Safety and Standards Authority of India has been set up under the
provisions of the Food Safety and Standards Act with the mandate to inter alia lay down the
standards and regulate the foods of livestock origin. The principles of food safety will be
emphasized in primary production system so that food safety concerns and traceability issues
are addressed throughout the entire food chain, viz., livestock rearers and primary producers,
food processors as well as marketing networks. Entire food sector is required to ensure
quality, safety and suitability of food for human consumption. Livestock origin food and food
products have to be free of contaminants, toxins, pathogens, pesticides and antibiotic
residues, harmful additives and adulterants.
15.2 In order to improve and encourage quality, the concept of premium on quality would be
highlighted. Quality processing, attractive packaging, cold chain and suitable marketing
network would be made an integral part of production and processing. States may be
encouraged to promote Public Private Partnership initiatives in this regard.
15.3 A system of traceability of livestock products would be promoted.

15.4 The production of organic livestock foods will be encouraged through traceability of
methods of feeding, treatment and quality production. Standardization of processes of
production and certification of organic farming processes would be established.
15.5 Awareness generation among farmers and consumers regarding food safety
standards would be promoted.
16. Institutional Credit and Livestock Insurance
16.1 The livestock sector’s ability to fully achieve its growth potential in productivity and
output is directly influenced by timely availability and accessibility of institutional credit.
Hence, measures to facilitate access to credit especially to small holders would be promoted
along with necessary forward and backward linkages. Small holders/farmers would be
encouraged/ supported to organize as Self Help Groups or Joint Liability Groups to facilitate
access to credit for activities relating to livestock. Farmer Producers’ Organizations including
producers’ companies would be promoted to facilitate flow of credit for activities and projects
relating to livestock production and marketing. State governments would be encouraged to
collect applications for different livestock activities/ projects from interested farmers in clusters
for which the infrastructure would be created or strengthened with government support. Public
Private Partnership initiatives to take up such activities in clusters with linkage for institutional
finance and marketing would be supported.
16.2 Creation of remunerative livestock production system requires reasonable protection
against the risks due to natural calamities and disease outbreaks etc. The insurance coverage
for such exigencies will be encouraged. Livestock insurance would be revamped and made
accessible to all farmers.
17. Livestock and Environment
17.1 The research on impact of climatic change on livestock production and measures
required to mitigate the same would be strengthened.

17.2 Efforts will be made to modify the management and feeding systems so as to reduce
emission of green house gases by livestock. Conversion of high fibre fodder into silage and
chaffing/chopping of such fodder would be encouraged.
17.3 Use of microbes which can absorb methane to convert it to other products would be
promoted.
17.4 Efforts would be made for better management of farm yard manure through
composting and bio-gas plants under different programmes.
17.5 Awareness building on improved practices of livestock, feed and waste management
would be supported by Government.
17.6 States would be encouraged/ supported to provide assistance to interested gaushalas
and NGOs to shelter and take care of the disabled, sterile, old and sick animals to prevent
spread of disease and breeding by some of these animals.
18. Information System and Human Resources
18.1 Animal Production and Health Information
The database on animal production and animal health is critical for proper planning. Existing
data gaps would be identified and steps would be taken to generate data and disseminate the
same for proper planning and programme implementation. Greater emphasis will be laid on
collection of accurate and credible data on number of different species of livestock and their
breeds, livestock products, fodder and feed grains production, impact of livestock diseases
etc. at regular intervals. The data so generated will be analysed to correlate and assess the
impact of various programmes towards general welfare of livestock farmers and other
entrepreneurs.
18.2 Human Resource and Training

It is recognized that for faster growth of the livestock sector, there is growing need for qualified
and trained human resource. Human resource development would be given a high priority in
livestock development to meet the qualitative and quantitative shortage of manpower. Steps
would be taken to encourage establishment of veterinary colleges in private sector complying
the prescribed standards of veterinary education. Emphasis would be given on developing
skill sets among farmers required for scientific management of livestock. Optimal requirement
of human resource to support various programmes would be worked out and steps be taken
to generate the same through involvement of government agencies, reputed NGOs and
private sector.
18.3 The focus would be on building strong infrastructure for education, practical training,
strengthening of the research and development facilities, harmonization of syllabi and
admission process. This would help to produce quality graduates and para-veterinarians,
which would effectively support the requirements in the field and help in building strong
community of teachers and researchers to man the education and training institutions. A
cadre of para-veterinarians would be created by training the progressive livestock farmers and
service providers by imparting necessary skill based training in different aspects of livestock
management to provide necessary service to farmers, early detection and treatment of
diseases and other related issues.
18.4 Training and orientation programmes would be supported for farmers and auxiliary
staff to build a responsive rural network.
19. Institutional Mechanism for Implementation
19.1 The states may review and prepare their respective livestock and breeding policies
taking into account the National Livestock Policy to suit the local needs. The Department of
Animal Husbandry, Dairying and Fisheries would provide necessary assistance to states in
this regard, if required by the concerned state government.
19.2 A National Steering Committee would be constituted with representatives of the States
and UTs, cooperatives, reputed NGO and private sector stake holders to facilitate

implementation and operationalization of the policy, review and advice on changes in policy
as and when necessary.
19.3 States would be requested to constitute Steering Committee at state level for the
purpose mentioned in para 19.2.
19.4 Expert Committees will be constituted to advice on research needs and application of
recommendations on various aspects of livestock production, livestock health and control of
different diseases, nutrition, management, marketing and mitigation of impact of climate
change etc.