

The Policy for Archaeological Survey of India Guides to
perform within Centrally Protected Monuments
Introduction & Objectives
Archaeological Survey of India (ASI), under the Ministry of Culture, is the premier
organization for the archaeological researches and protection of the cultural heritage of
the nation. Maintenance of ancient monuments and archaeological sites and remains of
national importance is the prime concern of the ASI. Besides, it regulates all
archaeological activities in the country as per the provisions of the Ancient Monuments
and Archaeological Sites and Remains (AMASR) Act, 1958 and Rules, 1959 with
subsequent amendments.
ASI administers and manages 3687 ancient monuments and archaeological
sites and remains of national importance through its 29 Circles and 3 Mini-circles. Being
a custodian of centrally protected monuments and responsible to manage all affairs
related to protected monuments, the Archaeological Survey of India is mandated to
take actions so that activities are taken up in harmony with the provisions of AMASR
Act, 1958 and Rules, 1959 made there under.
Guiding involves disseminating knowledge about our cultural heritage among the
common masses such as tourists, students or common art lovers who require varying
nature of information before and while visiting any place of their choice. The experience
acquired with the help of received or gathered information, enrich the, knowledge of
individual, help one to plan things in advance and ease out one’s stay at tourist
destinations, which make the tour memorable as a whole.
Tourists may need simple information on subjects like accommodation,
transportation, places of interest, market, medical aid, helpline, other offices, etc.,
besides detailed and authentic information about national monuments. signages,
published literature, electronic media, web world, etc. are flooded with information on
varied subjects but ultimately has their own limitations. In spite of having information
through various resources, everybody wants to visit his place of interest once in a life.
While visiting the heritage site, a tourist requires authentic information for that purpose
a guide appears to be the best medium of communication for providing information on
the spot to tourists as per their interest and requirement and oriented according to the
queries. Personal interaction is the best medium to disseminate information. So far as
centrally protected monuments are concerned, the Guide would play a vital role in
disseminating correct and factual information with his knowledge and experience so
that the visitor is enriched and enjoys his experience during his visit to the monument in
the larger context.
Guiding in Centrally Protected Monuments or monuments & sites
maintained/administered/managed by the Archaeological Survey of India by charging
certain fee from visitor attracts provisions the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological
Sites and Remains Rules, 1959. Rule 8 of the AMASR Rules, 1959 provides prohibition
of certain acts within the monument or site. Sub Rule 8(d) of the above rules specifies
requirement of a licence from designated authority for guiding with charging certain fee
in the premises of Centrally Protected Monument.

Rule 8(d) : No person shall within a protected monuments hawk or sell
any goods or wares or canvas any custom for such goods or wares or
display any advertisement in any form or show a visitor round or take
his photograph for monetary consideration, except under the authority
of, or under, and in accordance with the conditions of, a licence granted
by an archaeological officer or Additional Director General, Ministry of
Tourism, Government of India for the purposes of showing a visitor
round;
At present, the above Rule position is under implementation by the ASI and shall
be applicable for the purposes of this Policy document.
Further, to facilitate the issuing of guide licence and related affairs, vide
notification S.O. 73 (E) dated 21.01.2003, the Additional Director General, Ministry of
Tourism, Government of India has been delegated with powers for framing and issuing
of guidelines, for issuance of the guide licences, approval and registration of qualified
persons selected through due process by a committee constituted for the purpose to
operate in the protected monuments of national importance.
That the said delegation is being withdrawn.
2. Scope and effect
2.1 That from now onwards there shall be only one category of guides known as
“ASI Monument guide” who would be authorized to work in the centrally
protected monuments or monuments & sites maintained / administered /
managed by the Archaeological Survey of India for which he is licenced. The
policy shall be applicable only to such guides who are allowed to work in the
centrally protected monuments or monuments & sites maintained /
administered / managed by the Archaeological Survey of India having valid
licence granted by the Specified Authority as required under Rule 8(d) of the
AMASR Rules, 1959.
2.2 The assessment of number of tourist guides for each monument or group of
monuments would be determined by the foot fall, growth potential, extent and
size of the monuments/group of monuments. The process would be done
every five years by the Archaeological Survey of India.
2.3 The licence would be granted to individuals only and not to any firm or
association or company or other body corporate, after following due process
of selection.
2.4 The Archaeological Survey of India shall be responsible for conducting the
tests and work out mechanism for grant of such licences. In so far as
Monument Guides operating within the centrally protected monuments are
concerned, the various categories of guides who have qualified the test to be
conducted under this policy shall only be entitled to operate within the
centrally protected monuments.
2.5 This Policy shall acknowledge all licences given to guides working at Fatehpur
Sikri, by the Archaeological Survey of India pursuant to the directions of the
Hon’ble Supreme Court of India and shall be deemed to have been given
under this policy, till fresh licences are issued to such guides in accordance
with present policy, which shall not be later than one year from the date of

notification of this policy.
Provided that the Archaeological Survey of India shall conduct the necessary
examination within the said period of one year.
Similarly, all guide licences granted by the Additional Director General,
Department of Tourism, Ministry of Tourism (GOI) shall be acknowledged and
deemed to have been issued under this policy, till fresh licences are issued to
such guides in accordance with present policy, which shall not be later than
one year from the date of notification of this policy.
Provided that the Archaeological Survey of India shall conduct the necessary
examination within the said period of one year.
2.6 Only those Guides who have been issued licences under the present policy or
those who are deemed to have been licenced under clause 2.5A, subject to
the provisions thereof, shall be entitled to act as licenced guide(s) within the
Centrally Protected Monuments or monuments & sites maintained /
administered / managed by the Archaeological Survey of India.
2.7 Subject to clause 2.5A, on and after the issuance of Licences by the
Archaeological Survey of India under the present policy, all licences issued
earlier by any Authority shall become invalid and will not entitle any person to
act as Guides in the Centrally Protected Monuments or monuments & sites
maintained / administered / managed by the Archaeological Survey of India.
2.8 Date of Effect : the policy shall came into the force from the date on which it is
formally notified by the ASI. It shall not have retrospective effect.
3. Selection criterion.
3.1 Educational Qualification: following qualification is recommended.
Educational Experience Language
qualification
Bachelor Degree Guide should have He should have fluency in
(Ancient History, sufficient experience in one or more languages.
Medieval history, Modern guiding at monuments.
history, with knowledge
of art and architecture)
Desirable : Degree in Specific experience of Knowledge of a foreign
tourism / hotel guiding in the monument language in addition to
management or group of monument. English.
The Archaeological Survey of India may in the interest and expediency exempt
or relax the educational qualifications taking into consideration the experience
possessed by a candidate/s in the given case.
3.2 Age Limit.
(a) The Individual should be of minimum 21 years of age at the time of
submission of application for a fresh licence.

(b) The licence of an ASI monument guide, who has attained 60 years of age,
shall thereafter be renewed subject to medical fitness test and a report
certifying the fitness of the concerned guide.
3.3 Other conditions.
(a) He should be a citizen of India.
(b) He should have clean Police record or should not have any criminal case
pending against him/her.
(c) He should not have been convicted / penalized in the past.
(d) Preference may be given to local candidate who is well versed with the
monuments of that area.
3.4. Domicile Proof.
(a) Candidates who wish to work as Guides will have to submit their
residence proof of the State in which the tourist destination / monument /
site is situated.
(b) Candidates have to submit the proof of Domicile with the application.
(c) The following are recommended as documentary proof for Domicile:
(i) Certificate of proof of Residence by the competent authority (not
below the rank of Tehsildar).
(ii) Passport.
(iii) Voter Identity Card.
(iv) Ration Card.
4. Process of selection.
4.1 Wide publicity shall be given while inviting applications for grant of licence
and sufficient time shall be given for filling up of applications.
4.2 The applications shall be invited through open advertisement specifying the
number of guides with respect to specific monument or group of monuments.
4.3 Individuals shall submit their application(s) in the prescribed Form, as
specified by the Archaeological Survey of India along with photocopies of all
documents required as proof of their eligibility and in no case applicants shall
be allowed to submit any additional document/s as such proof at a later
stage.
4.4 The process of selection shall comprise written test and viva voce.
4.5 The entire process shall be conducted in a fair and transparent manner.
4.6 Individual may apply for one or more licences in respect of specific
monuments or group of monuments. The maximum number of monument
specific licences which may be issued to a person shall not be more than 15
(fifteen) and in respect of group specific monuments the licences to be issued
shall not exceed 5(five) groups of monuments. Issuance of either category of
licence shall not be a bar for issuance of licence in the other category.
5. Written Test and Viva Voce
5.1 Examination for selection of required numbers of candidates for grant of
licence shall consist of written Test and Viva Voce.
5.2 Archaeological Survey of India shall formulate written test with a view to
testing the knowledge of candidate on history, architecture and significance
of monuments in addition to general awareness.

5.3 The written examination shall be more elaborate so that caliber and ability of
the candidate is well represented.
5.4 Archaeological Survey of India shall take written test and Viva Voce.
5.5 The Viva Voce shall be conducted by a committee comprising not less than
three experts, one each from ASI and MOT and another expert(s) as
Archaeological Survey of India may deem fit and proper.
5.6. Examinations/tests and viva voce shall be held in respect of both specific
monuments as well as group specific monuments.
5.7 Test or training shall be organized in such a manner that no two tests overlap
with each other. It shall be ensured that the dates of tests for group specific
monuments shall not clash with the dates for the tests concerning specific
monuments.
5.8 On completion of test and viva-voce, ASI shall draw a merit list for grant of
licences for monument specific and group of monuments specific guides.
6 Training
6.1 All candidates found successful after written test and viva voce shall be given
training.
6.2 Objective of the training should be to impart knowledge of essential guiding
skills, tourism products/ aspects of the destination & state, and fair
knowledge of social, political and economic policies etc., of the destination/
region in specific and entire country in general. The detailed syllabi would be
laid down by the Archaeological Survey of India in consultation with the
Ministry of Tourism, GOI.
6.3 The duration of the Training to candidates is recommended as under:
Duration of class room training : 4 weeks
Duration of field training : 2 weeks
6.4 Archaeological Survey of India shall design a training module- monument
specific as well as group of monument specifics, basics and ethics,
rules, etc., in consultation with the Ministry of Tourism, GOI.
6.5 The field training would be given to all successful candidates to enrich their
knowledge to cover monument(s) for which the licence is granted.
6.6 During the training course frequent group discussions & role plays shall be
arranged to improve their interactive and relational abilities.
6.7 At the end of training each candidate shall submit a report on the given
assignment for valuation.
7. Issuance of guide licence.
7.1 On completion of guide training course, certificate to all candidates would be
issued by Archaeological Survey of India.
7.2 Issue of licence: successful candidates after going through training and
completion of required assignment shall be given licence by the
Archaeological Survey of India under Rule 8 (d) of AMASR Rules, 1959.
7.3 Archaeological Survey of India may design an ID card to be issued to all
guides with licence.
8. Fee for licence : Archaeological Survey of India may charge fee from guides as
notified from time to time.

9. Renewal of licence:
9.1 Every licence shall be renewed after five years subject to applicable
guidelines and/ or terms and conditions, if any.
9.2 The renewal of licence shall not be automatic. A licence shall be renewed
after an interview of the applicant guide. The interview shall aim to test
whether the concerned guide has updated his information/knowledge about
the concerned monument or not in keeping with passage of time. Pending
complaints, if any, against that applicant who intends to renew his licence
shall be taken into account at the time of renewal. Renewal cannot be
claimed as a matter of right.
9.3 Archaeological Survey of India shall be entitled to charge a fee for renewal of
guide licence, as shall be notified.
10. Renewal of licence upon attaining 60 years:
Presently no specific age of retirement is being specified. However, after
attaining the age of 60 years a guide shall have to undergo a Medical Fitness
test and obtain a certificate from a Registered Medical Practitioner (RMP)
certifying that he is both physically and mentally fit for duties of a guide, before
renewal of licence. No renewal of licence of a guide who has attained the age of
60 years shall be granted without such fitness test and the necessary medical
certificate.
11. Loss of licence/ID : In case of loss or theft of licence or ID, the concerned guide
shall immediately inform the concerned authority in writing and also give written
information of such loss or theft to local police station.
12. Duplicate licence/ID:
12.1 For Duplicate licence or ID card, as the case may be, the candidate shall
make an application to the Archaeological Survey of India for the purpose in
the format as specified by the ASI.
12.2 Archaeological Survey of India may charge a fee for issue of duplicate
licence or ID card as the case may be.
12.3 After completing the required process, duplicate licence or ID card shall be
issued to the candidate, which shall not be later than 30 days from the date of
his application.
13. Management of Guides.
13.1 Archaeological Survey of India reserves the right to specify and restrict the
total number of guides who may be permitted to operate in a specific
monument or a group of monuments.
13.2 Archaeological Survey of India reserves the right to vary, reduce or increase
the number of guides with respect to any monument or group of monuments
as may be required and deemed fit by ASI depending upon change of
attending circumstances or for any other reason or reasons, necessitating
such variance in the number of operating as ASI Monument Guides.
13.3 Archaeological Survey of India shall specify detailed guidelines, dos and
don’ts for the guides within premises of the monument.
13.4 Archaeological Survey of India shall specify other required conditions to be
followed or imposed for smooth functioning of the guiding system in

monuments in the interest of tourists and propagation of historical and
archaeological significance of the protected monuments.
13.5 Archaeological Survey of India shall be entitled to regulate the functioning of
guides and guiding activities within the area of monuments of national
importance.
13.6 The Superintending Archaeologist of a Circle shall have the right to bar the
entry of any ASI Monument Guide on grounds of misconduct or other
grounds of misbehavior with tourists or any other like reason or in the interest
of safeguarding the welfare of the monument and the tourists.
13.7 In addition to the above, the Superintending Archaeologist of the Circle shall
have the right to recommend suspension or cancellation of a licence on the
grounds as mentioned in the preceding paragraph.
14. Feedback : ASI shall put in place a mechanism to collect feedback from visitors
on guiding activities within the centrally protected monuments or sites
maintained / administered / managed by the Archaeological Survey of India.
15. Publicity: ASI shall take all steps for making adequate publicity not only
concerning the monuments under its protection but also the information about
guide and guide activities.
15. Powers: ASI reserves the right to make amend, alter or modify this policy as
may be required from time to time.
***